C. Liu et al., "Closed-Loop Control of Tremor-Predominant Parkinsonian State Based on Parameter Estimation," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 1109-1121, Oct. 2016, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2016.2535358.
Abstract: A significant feature of Parkinson's disease (PD) is the inability of the thalamus to respond faithfully to sensorimotor information from the cerebral cortex. This may be the result of abnormal oscillations in the basal ganglia (BG). Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is regarded as an effective method to modulate these pathological brain rhythmic activities. However, the selection of DBS parameters is challenging because the mechanism is not well understood. This work proposes the design of a closed-loop control strategy to automatically adjust the parameters of a DBS waveform based on a computational model. By estimating the synaptic input from BG to the thalamic neuron model as feedback variable, we designed and compared various control algorithms to counteract the effects of pathological oscillatory inputs. We then obtained optimal DBS parameters to modulate the tremor-predominant Parkinsonian state. We showed that even a simple proportional controller provides higher fidelity of thalamic relay of sensorimotor information and lower energy expenditure, as compared with classical open-loop DBS. Integral action further enhances DBS performance. Additionally, a positive bias voltage further improves the relay ability of the thalamus with decreased stimulation energy expenditure. These findings were conducive to the development of a more effective DBS to further improve the treatment of the PD.
keywords: {Neurons;Satellite broadcasting;Electrical engineering;Relays;Electronic mail;Computational modeling;Automation;Closed-loop control;parameter estimation;thalamocortical relay neuron;tremor-predominant parkinsonian state;unscented Kalman filter},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7422152&isnumber=7585043


Y. Zhou, Z. Habibollahi, A. Ibrahim, M. E. Jenkins, M. D. Naish and A. L. Trejos, "Real-Time Performance Assessment of High-Order Tremor Estimators Used in a Wearable Tremor Suppression Device," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 30, pp. 2856-2865, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3211450.
Abstract: The side effects and complications of traditional treatments for treating pathological tremor have led to a growing research interest in wearable tremor suppression devices (WTSDs) as an alternative approach. Similar to how the human brain coordinates the function of the human system, a tremor estimator determines how a WTSD functions. Although many tremor estimation algorithms have been developed and validated, whether they can be implemented on a cost-effective embedded system has not been studied; furthermore, their effectiveness on tremor signals with multiple harmonics has not been investigated. Therefore, in this study, four tremor estimators were implemented, evaluated, and compared: Weighted-frequency Fourier Linear Combiner (WFLC), WFLC-based Kalman Filter (WFLC-KF), Band-limited Multiple FLC, and enhanced High-order WFLC-KF (eHWFLC-KF). This study aimed to evaluate the performance of each algorithm on a bench-top tremor suppression system with 18 recorded tremor motion datasets; and compare the performance of each estimator. The experimental evaluation showed that the eHWFLC-KF-based WTSD achieved the best performance when suppressing tremor with an average of 89.3% reduction in tremor power, and an average error when tracking voluntary motion of 6.6°/s. Statistical analysis indicated that the eHWFLC-KF-based WTSD is able to reduce the power of tremor better than the WFLC and WFLC-KF, and the BMFLC-based WTSD is better than the WFLC. The performance when tracking voluntary motion is similar among all systems. This study has proven the feasibility of implementing various tremor estimators in a cost-effective embedded system, and provided a real-time performance assessment of four tremor estimators.
keywords: {Frequency estimation;Estimation;Real-time systems;Pathology;Harmonic analysis;Time-frequency analysis;Performance evaluation;Tremor estimator;tremor suppression technique;pathological tremor;wearable tremor suppression device;hand tremor;assistive device},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9906950&isnumber=9695946


Y. Zhou, M. E. Jenkins, M. D. Naish and A. L. Trejos, "Characterization of Parkinsonian Hand Tremor and Validation of a High-Order Tremor Estimator," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1823-1834, Sept. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2018.2859793.
Abstract: Recent progress in wearable technology has made wearable tremor suppression devices (WTSDs) for Parkinson's patients a potentially viable alternative solution for tremor management. So far, in contrast to wrist and elbow tremor, finger tremors have not been studied in depth despite the huge impact that they have on a patient's daily life. In addition, more evidence has been found showing that the performance of current tremor estimators may be limited by their model order due to the multiple harmonics present in tremor. The aim of this paper is to characterize finger and wrist tremor in both the time and frequency domains, and to propose a high-order tremor estimation algorithm. Tremor magnitudes are reported in the forms of linear acceleration, angular velocity, and angular displacement. The activation of forearm flexor and extensor muscles is also investigated. The frequency analysis shows that Parkinsonian tremors produce oscillations of the hand with pronounced harmonics. At last, a high-order weighted-frequency Fourier linear combiner (WFLC)-based Kalman filter is proposed. The percentage estimation accuracy achieved from the proposed estimator is 96.3 ± 1.7%, showing average improvements of 28.5% and 48.9% over its lower-order counterpart and the WFLC. The proposed estimator shows promise for use in a WTSD.
keywords: {Thumb;Estimation;Wrist;Diseases;Pathology;Task analysis;Hand tremor;Parkinson’s disease;pathological tremor;tremor;tremor characterization;tremor estimation},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8419731&isnumber=8456910


A. Ibrahim, Y. Zhou, M. E. Jenkins, A. L. Trejos and M. D. Naish, "Real-Time Voluntary Motion Prediction and Parkinson’s Tremor Reduction Using Deep Neural Networks," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 29, pp. 1413-1423, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2021.3097007.
Abstract: Wearable tremor suppression devices (WTSD) have been considered as a viable solution to manage parkinsonian tremor. WTSDs showed their ability to improve the quality of life of individuals suffering from parkinsonian tremor, by helping them to perform activities of daily living (ADL). Since parkinsonian tremor has been shown to be nonstationary, nonlinear, and stochastic in nature, the performance of the tremor models used by WTSDs is affected by their inability to adapt to the nonlinear behaviour of tremor. Another drawback that the models have is their limitation to estimate or predict one step ahead, which introduces delay when used in real time with WTSDs, which compromises performance. To address these issues, this work proposes a deep neural network model that learns the correlations and nonlinearities of tremor and voluntary motion, and is capable of multi-step prediction with minimal delay. A generalized model that is task and user-independent is presented. The model achieved an average estimation percentage accuracy of 99.2%. The average future voluntary motion prediction percentage accuracy with 10, 20, 50, and 100 steps ahead was 97.0%, 94.0%, 91.6%, and 89.9%, respectively, with prediction time as low as 1.5 ms for 100 steps ahead. The proposed model also achieved an average of 93.8% ± 1.5% in tremor reduction when it was tested in an experimental setup in real time. The tremor reduction showed an improvement of 25% over the Weighted Fourier Linear Combiner (WFLC), an estimator commonly used with WTSDs.
keywords: {Logic gates;Predictive models;Computer architecture;Performance evaluation;Adaptation models;Frequency estimation;Feature extraction;Parkinson’s disease;pathological tremor;deep neural networks;tremor prediction;voluntary motion prediction;tremor estimation},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9481906&isnumber=9363468


Y. Zhou, M. E. Jenkins, M. D. Naish and A. L. Trejos, "Design and validation of a high-order weighted-frequency fourier linear combiner-based Kalman filter for parkinsonian tremor estimation," 2016 38th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL, USA, 2016, pp. 5893-5896, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7592069.Abstract: The design of a tremor estimator is an important part of designing mechanical tremor suppression orthoses. A number of tremor estimators have been developed and applied with the assumption that tremor is a mono-frequency signal. However, recent experimental studies have shown that Parkinsonian tremor consists of multiple frequencies, and that the second and third harmonics make a large contribution to the tremor. Thus, the current estimators may have limited performance on estimation of the tremor harmonics. In this paper, a high-order tremor estimation algorithm is proposed and compared with its lower-order counterpart and a widely used estimator, the Weighted-frequency Fourier Linear Combiner (WFLC), using 18 Parkinsonian tremor data sets. The results show that the proposed estimator has better performance than its lower-order counterpart and the WFLC. The percentage estimation accuracy of the proposed estimator is 85±2.9%, an average improvement of 13% over the lower-order counterpart. The proposed algorithm holds promise for use in wearable tremor suppression devices. keywords: {Harmonic analysis;Estimation;Power harmonic filters;Band-pass filters;Pathology;Frequency estimation;Physiology},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7592069&isnumber=7590615

P. Shukla, I. Basu and D. Tuninetti, "Towards closed-loop deep brain stimulation: Decision tree-based Essential Tremor patient's state classifier and tremor reappearance predictor," 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Chicago, IL, USA, 2014, pp. 2605-2608, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944156.Abstract: Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) is a surgical procedure to treat some progressive neurological movement disorders, such as Essential Tremor (ET), in an advanced stage. Current FDA-approved DBS systems operate open-loop, i.e., their parameters are unchanged over time. This work develops a Decision Tree (DT) based algorithm that, by using non-invasively measured surface EMG and accelerometer signals as inputs during DBS-OFF periods, classifies the ET patient's state and then predicts when tremor is about to reappear, at which point DBS is turned ON again for a fixed amount of time. The proposed algorithm achieves an overall accuracy of 93.3% and sensitivity of 97.4%, along with 2.9% false alarm rate. Also, the ratio between predicted tremor delay and the actual detected tremor delay is about 0.93, indicating that tremor prediction is very close to the instant where tremor actually reappeared. keywords: {Prediction algorithms;Satellite broadcasting;Accuracy;Sensitivity;Brain stimulation;Algorithm design and analysis;Entropy;Essential Tremor;Accelerometer;Surface EMG;Decision Tree;Gini index impurity function;Closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation;Tremor Prediction},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6944156&isnumber=6943513

S. Tatinati, K. C. Veluvolu, S. -M. Hong, W. T. Latt and W. T. Ang, "Physiological Tremor Estimation With Autoregressive (AR) Model and Kalman Filter for Robotics Applications," in IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 4977-4985, Dec. 2013, doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2013.2271737.
Abstract: This paper focuses on developing a simple and efficient tremor estimation algorithm suitable for real-time applications. Autoregressive model in combination with Kalman filter is employed for tremor estimation in robotics devices. A research is conducted with tremor data recorded from surgeons and novice subjects for model identification and characteristics. Results show that appropriate choice of model parameters improves the estimation accuracy. Comparison with existing tremor estimation methods is performed to analyze the performance. Experimental results for 1-DOF tremor estimation are provided to validate the approach.
keywords: {Performance evaluation;Analytical models;Accuracy;Simulation;Estimation;Surgery;Real-time systems;Data models;Kalman filters;Robots;Tremor;inertial sensors;AR modeling;Kalman filter;real-time estimation},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6552980&isnumber=6620941


A. Ibrahim, Y. Zhou, M. E. Jenkins, A. Luisa Trejos and M. D. Naish, "The Design of a Parkinson’s Tremor Predictor and Estimator Using a Hybrid Convolutional-Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network," 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2020, pp. 5996-6000, doi: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176132.Abstract: Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is considered to be the second most common age-related neuroegenerative disorder, and it is estimated that seven to ten million people worldwide have PD. One of the symptoms of PD is tremor, and studies have shown that wearable assistive devices have the potential to assist in suppressing it. However, despite the progress in the development of these devices, their performance is limited by the tremor estimators they use. Thus, a need for a tremor model that helps the wearable assistive devices to increase tremor suppression without impeding voluntary motion remains. In this work, a user-independent and task-independent tremor and voluntary motion detection method based on neural networks is proposed. Inertial measurement units (IMUs) were used to measure acceleration and angular velocity from participants with PD, these data were then used to train the neural network. The achieved estimation percentage accuracy of voluntary motion was 99.0%, and the future prediction percentage accuracy was 97.3%, 93.7%, 91.4% and 90.3% for 10 ms, 20 ms, 50 ms and 100 ms ahead, respectively. The root mean squared error (RMSE) achieved for tremor estimation was an average of 0.00087°/s on new unseen data, and the future prediction average RMSE across the different tasks achieved was 0.001°/s, 0.002°/s, 0.020°/s and 0.049°/s for 1 ms, 2 ms, 5 ms, and 10 ms ahead, respectively. Therefore, the proposed method shows promise for use in wearable suppression devices. keywords: {Task analysis;Neurons;Convolution;Feature extraction;Estimation;Neural networks;Assistive devices},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9176132&isnumber=9175149

M. D. Hssayeni, J. Jimenez-Shahed, M. A. Burack and B. Ghoraani, "Continuous Parkinsonian Tremor Estimation Using Motion Data," 2019 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2019, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/GlobalSIP45357.2019.8969093.Abstract: Tremor is one of the main symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) that reduces the quality of life of affected patients. Tremor is measured as part of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III. However, the assessment is based on onsite physical examinations and do not necessarily represent the patients’ tremor experience in their day-to-day life. In this work, we developed two methods based on deep long short-term memory (LSTM) networks and gradient tree boosting to estimate Parkinsonian tremor using gyroscope sensor signals collected as the patients performed a variety of free body movements. The developed methods were assessed on data from 24 PD subjects. Subject-based, leave-one-out cross-validation demonstrated that the method based on gradient tree boosting provided a high correlation (r=0.93 (p<0.0001)) between the estimated and clinically-assessed tremor subscores in comparison to the LSTM-based method with (r=0.77 (p<0.0001)). keywords: {Wrist;Correlation;Estimation;Information processing;Boosting;Kinetic theory;Gyroscopes;Long short term memory;Wearable sensors;Diseases},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8969093&isnumber=8969075

K. Adhikari, S. Tatinati, K. C. Veluvolu, J. A. Chambers and K. Nazarpour, "Real-time physiological tremor estimation using recursive singular spectrum analysis," 2017 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Jeju, Korea (South), 2017, pp. 3202-3205, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2017.8037538.Abstract: Physiological hand tremor causes undesirable vibration of hand-held surgical instruments which results in imprecisions and poor surgical outcomes. Existing tremor cancellation algorithms are based on detection of the tremulous component from the whole motion; then adding an anti-phase tremor signal to the whole motion to cancel it out. These techniques are based on adaptive filtering algorithms which need a reference signal that is highly correlated with the actual tremor signal. Hence, such adaptive approaches use a non-linear phase filter to pre-filter the tremor signal either offline or in real-time. However, pre-filtering causes unnecessary delays and non-linear phase distortions as the filter has frequency selective delays. Consequently, the anti-phase tremor signal cannot be generated accurately which results in poor tremor cancellation. In this paper, we present a new technique based on singular spectrum analysis (SSA) and its recursive version, that is, recursive singular spectrum analysis (RSSA). These algorithms decompose the whole motion into dominant voluntary components corresponding to larger eigenvalues and oscillatory tremor components having smaller eigenvalues. By selecting a group of specific decomposed signals based on their eigenvalues and spectral range, both voluntary and tremor signals can be reconstructed accurately. We test the SSA and RSSA algorithms using recorded tremor data from five novice subjects. This new approach shows the tremor signal can be estimated from the whole motion with an accuracy of up to 85% offline. In real-time, tolerating a delay of ≈ 72ms, the tremor signal can be estimated with at least 70% accuracy. This delay is found to be one-tenth of the delay caused by a conventional linear-phase bandpass filter to achieve similar performance in real-time. keywords: {Real-time systems;Delays;Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions;Physiology;Time series analysis;Covariance matrices;Estimation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8037538&isnumber=8036736

M. Bhat, S. Inamdar, D. Kulkarni, G. Kulkarni and R. Shriram, "Parkinson's disease prediction based on hand tremor analysis," 2017 International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP), Chennai, India, 2017, pp. 0625-0629, doi: 10.1109/ICCSP.2017.8286433.Abstract: Parkinson's disease is a progressive disorder of the nervous system marked by tremor, muscular rigidity and slow, imprecise movement, chiefly affecting middle-aged and elderly people. This paper presents a non-invasive, reliable method for the prediction of Parkinson's disease by analysis of hand tremors using an accelerometer type of sensor. The frequency of the tremors experienced in Parkinson's disease lies between the range of 3–8 Hertz. The accelerometer is used to measure these tremors and further computation is done in MATLAB. This obtained time domain signal is then converted into frequency domain using Fast Fourier Transform and the dominant frequency component is determined. Data of 7 subjects is collected out of which 3 subjects are suffering from Parkinson's disease and remaining 4 are normal subjects. The results obtained proved that the frequency of the hand tremors in Parkinson's patient lies between 3–8 Hertz and the readings obtained on all the three axes are almost same. The proposed system can be used by the general physicians for the prediction of Parkinson's disease without the conventional and expensive diagnostic tools. keywords: {Diseases;Capacitors;Accelerometers;Neurons;Matlab;Bandwidth;Imaging;Accelerometer;Fast Fourier Transform (FFT);Parkinson's disease;Tremors},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8286433&isnumber=8286342

K. C. Veluvolu, S. Tatinati, S. -M. Hong and W. T. Ang, "Multistep Prediction of Physiological Tremor for Surgical Robotics Applications," in IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3074-3082, Nov. 2013, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2013.2264546.
Abstract: Accurate canceling of physiological tremor is extremely important in robotics-assisted surgical instruments/procedures. The performance of robotics-based hand-held surgical devices degrades in real time due to the presence of phase delay in sensors (hardware) and filtering (software) processes. Effective tremor compensation requires zero-phase lag in filtering process so that the filtered tremor signal can be used to regenerate an opposing motion in real time. Delay as small as 20 ms degrades the performance of human-machine interference. To overcome this phase delay, we employ multistep prediction in this paper. Combined with the existing tremor estimation methods, the procedure improves the overall accuracy by 60% for tremor estimation compared to single-step prediction methods in the presence of phase delay. Experimental results with developed methods for 1-DOF tremor estimation highlight the improvement.
keywords: {Physiology;Tremors;Physiology;Real-time systems;Surgical robots;Adaptation models;Autoregressive (AR);band limited multiple linear Fourier combiner (BMFLC);inertial sensors;Kalman filter;multistep prediction;physiological motion;tremor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6530703&isnumber=6634541


Y. Luo, Y. Gao, Q. Li and J. Zhao, "Central Pattern Generator Based Band-Limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner for Tremor Estimation in Functional Electrical Stimulation System," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), Changchun, China, 2018, pp. 1299-1304, doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2018.8484735.Abstract: Central pattern generator (CPG) is a useful mathematic model to describe the periodic motion of human. As the pathological tremor can be approximated as roughly periodic and sinusoidal motion signal, the CPG based algorithm for tremor signal processing exhibits great potential. However, CPG for pathological tremor suppression has rarely been applied in real time implementation. In this work, a new algorithm named central pattern generator based band limited multiple Fourier linear combiner (CPG-BMLC) for tremor suppression in functional stimulation system (FES) is proposed. The proposed algorithm is employed to process the signal collected from the patient with Parkinson tremor. The stimulation results have shown that CPG-BMLC can predict the motion signal and filter off the high frequency tremor accurately. In addition, the algorithm is programed in FES for tremor suppression in real time. The experimental results verify that the CPG-BMFLC in FES can suppress frequency tremor signal in real-time implementation. The CPG-BMLC in FES for tremor suppression can extract the tremor part from motion and suppress the tremor accurately. keywords: {Iron;Prediction algorithms;Oscillators;Estimation;Real-time systems;Muscles;Generators;Tremor Suppression;Functional Stimulation System;Central Pattern Generator;Band-limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8484735&isnumber=8484266

S. Shahtalebi, A. Mohammadi, S. F. Atashzar and R. V. Patel, "A multi-rate and auto-adjustable wavelet decomposition framework for pathological hand tremor extraction," 2017 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2017, pp. 432-436, doi: 10.1109/GlobalSIP.2017.8308679.Abstract: Estimation/extraction of pathological tremor signal is of paramount importance in different rehabilitation and clinical applications as it assists the physicians to evaluate the treatment response and investigate undiscovered aspects of tremor disorder. This paper is particularly motivated by the crucial need for having real-time and accurate estimate of the tremor signal in robotic rehabilitation systems to filter out (attenuate) the tremor from the voluntary movement of the patient. We propose a novel, multi-rate and auto-adjustable wavelet decomposition framework, referred to as the MAWD, for pathological hand tremor extraction. The proposed framework consists of two schemes running in parallel, i.e., hyper-parameter adjustment (HPA) scheme and real-time tremor prediction (RTP) scheme. More specifically the aforementioned schemes adaptively decompose the measurement signal consisting of both tremor and voluntary motion into different levels of approximation and use polynomial extrapolation to predict the value of the desired signal for the next time instant. The performance of the proposed framework is evaluated based on real pathological tremor data. The results indicate that the MAWD provides improved accuracy in comparison to the recently developed state-of-the-art pathological tremor estimation methodology. keywords: {Real-time systems;Pathology;Discrete wavelet transforms;Estimation;Robots;Wavelet Transforms;Rehabilitation Systems;Pathological Tremor;Predictive Estimation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8308679&isnumber=8308583

Shengxin Wang, Yongsheng Gao, Feiyun Xiao, Xizhe Zang, Yanhe Zhu and Jie Zhao, "Estimation of tremor parameters and extraction tremor from recorded signals for tremor suppression," 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Stockholm, 2016, pp. 3717-3722, doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487558.Abstract: Pathological tremor is defined as a roughly sinusoidal movement and usually occurs in the upper limb impacting individuals activities of daily livings. Functional electrical stimulation (FES) is proposed as a potential alternative for cancelling the pathological tremor. However, the feasibility and accuracy of FES depends on the estimation of amplitude and frequency of tremor signals measured by sensors. In this study, a novel algorithm incorporating a sliding fast Fourier transform (SFFT), an interpolation procedure and a limitation module of frequency range is developed to estimate tremor frequency and separate the tremor components from raw data. Based on the artificial signals and the actual tremor signals, the performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated. The experimental results indicate that the developed algorithm could quickly adapt to the unknown dominant frequency and extract the tremor components with high accuracy. Therefore, this method could be employed in the tremor suppression by FES without affecting the voluntary movement. keywords: {Frequency estimation;Time-frequency analysis;Damping;Frequency modulation;Pathology;Band-pass filters},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7487558&isnumber=7487087

J. A. Gallego, E. Rocon and J. L. Pons, "Estimation of instantaneous tremor parameters for FES-based tremor suppression," 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Anchorage, AK, USA, 2010, pp. 2922-2927, doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2010.5509663.Abstract: Pathological tremor constitutes the most common movement disorder, and is increasing its prevalence with ageing. Treatment forms range from drugs to surgery in those patients refractory to drugs, however, tremor is not effectively managed in about 25% of patients. According to this, new management techniques such as wearable robots that take advantage of selective biomechanical loading seem an interesting alternative. Our objective is to design robotic exoskeletons which suppress tremor, letting the user perform a voluntary movement, by means of intelligent control approaches that include accurate tremor models. In this context, we propose a two-stage algorithm for real-time estimation of time varying tremor amplitude and frequency. It is based on the assumption that tremor alters voluntary motion in an additive manner, and happens in a higher frequency band. The two-stage algorithm first generates an estimation of voluntary movement based on its inherent slower dynamics, and then removes it from the total motion, directly providing an estimate of tremor. This tremor estimation is then fed into an adaptive filter, which provides instantaneous tremor characteristics. Accurate and robust tremor amplitude and frequency estimates are obtained. keywords: {Frequency estimation;Drugs;Amplitude estimation;Motion estimation;Pathology;Aging;Medical treatment;Surgery;Intelligent robots;Exoskeletons},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5509663&isnumber=5509124

P. Qi, J. Yang, Y. Dai, H. Zhang and J. Tong, "A Novel Approach to Parkinson’s Tremor Suppression: E-BMFLC and LADRC Integration," in IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 145871-145880, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3424395.
Abstract: Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative condition characterized by tremor, which is one of its primary clinical manifestations. This involuntary trembling significantly diminishes the quality of life for affected individuals. The objective of this study is to approach a novel tremor suppression system for individuals with Parkinson’s tremor, providing a non-invasive mechanical remedy for tremor alleviation. The proposed system comprises a tremor estimator utilizing the Enhanced Band-limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (E-BMFLC) and a control system employing Linear Active Disturbance Rejection Control (LADRC). The tremor estimator’s role is to separate tremor and voluntary motion signals from the comprehensive hand motion signal, which are subsequently fed into the control system. The controller activates a Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor (PMSM) to counteract tremor disturbances, accomplishing the dual objectives of voluntary motion tracking and tremor disruption suppression. The evaluation of the designed system is conducted through experiments on a simulation platform. Tremor data collected from ten patients diagnosed with PD are employed for testing. Ultimately, a comparative analysis and discussion were conducted involving different estimation algorithms and controllers. The present results indicate the tremor estimator yields an average root-mean-squared-error (RMSE) of 0.030 and an estimation coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.871 for tremor signal amplitude estimation. Moreover, the control system demonstrates an average Normalized-RMSE of 0.0279 when tracking voluntary motion. Within the tremor frequency band, the average tremor signal power suppression rate (TPSR) attains 99.05%.
keywords: {Torque;Control systems;Estimation;Wrist;Muscles;Orthotics;Frequency estimation;Parkinson's disease;Permanent magnet motors;Simulation;Tremor suppression;tremor estimator;linear active disturbance rejection control;permanent magnet synchronous motor;simulation},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10587257&isnumber=10380310


A. Pascual-Valdunciel et al., "Prediction of Pathological Tremor Signals Using Long Short-Term Memory Neural Networks," in IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 5930-5941, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2022.3209316.
Abstract: Previous implementations of closed-loop peripheral electrical stimulation (PES) strategies have provided evidence about the effect of the stimulation timing on tremor reduction. However, these strategies have used traditional signal processing techniques that only consider phase prediction and might not model the non-stationary behavior of tremor. Here, we tested the use of long short-term memory (LSTM) neural networks to predict tremor signals using kinematic data recorded from Essential Tremor (ET) patients. A dataset comprising wrist flexion-extension data from 12 ET patients was pre-processed to feed the predictors. A total of 180 models resulting from the combination of network (neurons and layers of the LSTM networks, length of the input sequence and prediction horizon) and training parameters (learning rate) were trained, validated and tested. Predicted tremor signals using LSTM-based models presented high correlation values (from 0.709 to 0.998) with the expected values, with a phase delay between the predicted and real signals below 15 ms, which corresponds approximately to 7.5% of a tremor cycle. The prediction horizon was the parameter with a higher impact on the prediction performance. The proposed LSTM-based models were capable of predicting both phase and amplitude of tremor signals outperforming results from previous studies (32--56% decreased phase prediction error compared to the out-of-phase method), which might provide a more robust PES-based closed-loop control applied to PES-based tremor reduction.
keywords: {Electromyography;Biological neural networks;Electrical stimulation;Machine learning;Long short term memory;Machine learning;LSTM;peripheral electrical stimulation;tremor prediction;essential tremor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9904814&isnumber=9973412


N. Khobragade, D. Graupe and D. Tuninetti, "Towards fully automated closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation in Parkinson's disease patients: A LAMSTAR-based tremor predictor," 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 2015, pp. 2616-2619, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318928.Abstract: This paper describes the application of the LAMSTAR (LArge Memory STorage and Retrieval) neural network for prediction of onset of tremor in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients to allow for on-off adaptive control of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS). Currently, the therapeutic treatment of PD by DBS is an open-loop system where continuous stimulation is applied to a target area in the brain. This work demonstrates a fully automated closed-loop DBS system so that stimulation can be applied on-demand only when needed to treat PD symptoms. The proposed LAMSTAR network uses spectral, entropy and recurrence rate parameters for prediction of the advent of tremor after the DBS stimulation is switched off. These parameters are extracted from non-invasively collected surface electromyography and accelerometry signals. The LAMSTAR network has useful characteristics, such as fast retrieval of patterns and ability to handle large amount of data of different types, which make it attractive for medical applications. Out of 21 trials blue from one subject, the average ratio of delay in prediction of tremor to the actual delay in observed tremor from the time stimulation was switched off achieved by the proposed LAMSTAR network is 0.77. Moreover, sensitivity of 100% and overall performance better than previously proposed Back Propagation neural networks is obtained. keywords: {Neurons;Satellite broadcasting;Entropy;Training;Sensitivity;Switches;Brain stimulation;Parkinson's Disease;Tremor Onset Prediction;Closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation;LAMSTAR Neural Network;Accelerometer;Surface EMG},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7318928&isnumber=7318236

B. W. Robinson, D. Hernandez-Garduno and M. Saquib, "Fixed and floating point analysis of linear predictors for physiological hand tremor in microsurgery," 2010 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Dallas, TX, USA, 2010, pp. 578-581, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2010.5495574.Abstract: This paper presents the fixed and floating point implementations for field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA) of third-order hand tremor predictors using recursive-least square (RLS) and a proposed Kalman adaptation algorithms. The proposed algorithm outperforms RLS in convergence speed and mean square error (MSE). It also shows better numerical convergence than the RLS as the number of bits in fixed-point precision is reduced. Both fixed and floating point realizations are implemented and the hardware tradeoffs are discussed. A modified binary floating point format is proposed that takes advantage of the 18-bit hard macro multiplier within the Xilinx Virtex 5 Architecture in order to gain precision while preserving speed. The increased precision overcomes the prior known issues of explosive divergence and the stalling effect associated with the fixed point implementation of such adaptive algorithms, proving the feasibility of an FPGA based physiological hand tremor predictor. keywords: {Microsurgery;Surgery;Field programmable gate arrays;Resonance light scattering;Adaptive arrays;Kalman filters;Mean square error methods;Convergence of numerical methods;Hardware;Explosives;Hand tremor;adaptive filters;Kalman;fixed point arithmetic;floating point arithmetic},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5495574&isnumber=5494886

Y. Wang et al., "Multi-Step Prediction of Physiological Tremor With Random Quaternion Neurons for Surgical Robotics Applications," in IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 42216-42226, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2852323.
Abstract: Digital filters are employed in hand-held robotic instruments to separate the concomitant involuntary physiological tremor motion from the desired motion of micro-surgeons. Inherent phase-lag in digital filters induces phase distortion (time-lag/delay) into the separated tremor motion and it adversely affects the final tremor compensation. Owing to the necessity of digital filters in hand-held instruments, multi-step prediction of physiological tremor motion is proposed as a solution to counter the induced delay. In this paper, a quaternion variant for extreme learning machines (QELMs) is developed for multi-step prediction of the tremor motion. The learning paradigm of the QELM integrates the identified underlying relationship from 3-D tremor motion in the Hermitian space with the fast learning merits of ELMs theories to predict the tremor motion for a known horizon. Real tremor data acquired from micro-surgeons and novice subjects are employed to validate the QELM for various prediction horizons in-line with the delay induced by the order of digital filters. Prediction inferences underpin that the QELM method elegantly learns the cross-dimensional coupling of the tremor motion with random quaternion neurons and hence obtained significant improvement in prediction performance at all prediction horizons compared with existing methods.
keywords: {Quaternions;Physiology;Delays;Instruments;Robots;Neurons;Couplings;Surgical robotics;physiological tremor;multi-step prediction;random quaternion neurons;extreme learning machines},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8419248&isnumber=8274985


H. Jeon, S. K. Kim, B. Jeon and K. S. Park, "Distance estimation from acceleration for quantitative evaluation of Parkinson tremor," 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston, MA, USA, 2011, pp. 393-396, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090126.Abstract: The purpose of this paper is to assess Parkinson tremor estimating actual distance amplitude. We propose a practical, useful and simple method for evaluating Parkinson tremor with distance value. We measured resting tremor of 7 Parkinson Disease (PD) patients with triaxial accelerometer. Resting tremor of participants was diagnosed by Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) by neurologist. First, we segmented acceleration signal during 7 seconds from recorded data. To estimate a displacement of tremor, we performed double integration from the acceleration. Prior to double integration, moving average method was used to reduce an error of integral constant. After estimation of displacement, we calculated tremor distance during 1s from segmented signal using Euclidean distance. We evaluated the distance values compared with UPDRS. Averaged moving distance during 1 second corresponding to UPDRS 1 was 11.52mm, that of UPDRS 2 was 33.58mm and tremor distance of UPDRS 3 was 382.22 mm. Estimated moving distance during 1s was proportional to clinical rating scale — UPDRS. keywords: {Acceleration;Accelerometers;Educational institutions;Three dimensional displays;Surgery;Thumb},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6090126&isnumber=6089866

S. Tatinati and K. C. Veluvolu, "Multi-step tremor prediction autoregressive (AR) model and Kalman filter (KF) for surgical robotic applications," 2013 International Conference on Power, Energy and Control (ICPEC), Dindigul, India, 2013, pp. 473-477, doi: 10.1109/ICPEC.2013.6527703.Abstract: This paper focus on developing computationally simple and efficient tremor estimation algorithm suitable for real-time applications. Autoregressive (AR) model in combination with Kalman filter (KF) is employed for tremor estimation in surgical robotics devices. A study is conducted with tremor data recorded from surgeons and novice subjects for model identification and characteristics. Results show that appropriate choice of model parameters improves the estimation accuracy. Experimental results for 1-DOF tremor estimation are provided to validate the approach. keywords: {Estimation;Accuracy;Delays;Real-time systems;Adaptation models;Physiology;Accelerometers;Tremor;Autoregressive model;Kalman filter;Multi-step predition},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6527703&isnumber=6527608

K. Adhikari, S. Tatinati, K. C. Veluvolu and K. Nazarpour, "Improvement in modelling of physiological tremor by inclusion of grip force in quaternion weighted Fourier linear combiner," 2nd IET International Conference on Intelligent Signal Processing 2015 (ISP), London, UK, 2015, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1049/cp.2015.1782.Abstract: Physiological tremor is an involuntary oscillatory movement of body parts particularly exhibited in hands. The unintended vibrations due to tremor causes tip of the microsurgical tools to fluctuate unnecessarily causing unacceptable imprecisions in micro-surgeries. All the existing algorithms such as weighted Fourier Linear Combiner (wFLC), and its extensions, treat three x, y and z axes of tremor as three independent channels. However our correlation and coherence analysis showed that there is significant coupling between tremor channels. More importantly grip force by which a surgeon holds a surgical device also shows significant coupling with three tremor channels, which has never been investigated before. We first modelled the tremor in 3 dimensions (3-D) using quaternion algebra, and found 27% improvement which we have presented in our previous work. In this paper, we show modelling tremor in 4 dimensions by incorporating grip force and three tremor channels further exploits the cross-channel coupling information which is naturally inherent between force and xyz tremor channels. Using quaternion algebra we extract this coupling information to improve the tremor modelling performance. We show that estimation performance of tremor improves by 45% using 4-D model instead 3-D, yielding overall improvement of 65% from 1-D to 4-D. keywords: {Physiological tremor;quaternion algebra;A weighted Fourier linear combiner},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7745782&isnumber=7466034

S. Tatinati, Y. Wang, G. Shafiq and K. C. Veluvolu, "Online LS-SVM based multi-step prediction of physiological tremor for surgical robotics," 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 6043-6046, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610930.Abstract: Performance of robotics based hand-held surgical devices in real-time is mainly dependent on accurate filtering of physiological tremor. The presence of phase delay in sensors (hardware) and filtering (software) processes affects the cancellation accuracy. This paper focuses on developing an estimation algorithm to improve the estimation accuracy in the presence of phase delay for real-time implementations. Moving window based online training approach for least squares-support vector machines (LSSVM) is employed in this paper for tremor estimation. A study is conducted with tremor data recorded from the subjects to analyze the suitability of proposed approach for both single-step and multi-step prediction. keywords: {Training;Accuracy;Estimation;Delays;Physiology;Support vector machines;Prediction algorithms},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6610930&isnumber=6609410

I. Basu, D. Tuninetti, D. Graupe and K. V. Slavin, "Adaptive control of deep brain stimulator for Essential Tremor: Entropy-based tremor prediction using surface-EMG," 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston, MA, USA, 2011, pp. 7711-7714, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091900.Abstract: Entropy, as a measure of randomness in time-varying signals, is widely used in areas such as thermodynamics, statistical mechanics and information theory. This paper investigates the use of two commonly employed entropy measures, namely Wavelet Entropy and Approximate Entropy, as a predictor of tremor reappearance in Essential Tremor patients; the predictor input is a raw surface-electromyographic (sEMG) signal measured from tremor affected muscles of patients implanted with a Deep Brain Stimulator (DBS). A combination of both types of entropy measure is shown to successfully predict the occurrence of tremor few seconds before its visual manifestation. This result can potentially lead to a novel sEMG-based adaptive on-off DBS controller that can be added on to existing open-loop DBS systems with minimal changes; an adaptive DBS system provides stimulation only when needed thereby reducing the risk of brain over stimulation, delaying DBS intolerance and prolonging DBS battery life. keywords: {Entropy;Satellite broadcasting;Prediction algorithms;Muscles;Electrodes;Electromyography;Time frequency analysis},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6091900&isnumber=6089866

R. Cubo and A. Medvedev, "Online Tissue Conductivity Estimation in Deep Brain Stimulation," in IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 149-162, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TCST.2018.2862397.
Abstract: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an established therapy that consists of sending electrical pulses to specific brain areas via chronically implanted electrodes. DBS is used to alleviate symptoms of neurological conditions such as Parkinson's disease and essential tremor. However, the stimulation effect is patient-specific and hard to predict. In addition, electrical properties of the brain tissue around the lead change over time thus influencing the therapeutical effect. This paper proposes an approach to online conductivity estimation by applying a specially designed electrical probing signal to one contact of the DBS electrode and measuring the response on another one. A conductivity estimate is then obtained from the estimated parameters of a linear time-invariant model. Both voltage-controlled and current-controlled DBS systems are treated. Continuous least squares and the Laguerre domain identification are employed to estimate the model parameters. Results suggest that a smooth Gaussian-shaped signal is sufficient to identify the model in a noise-free situation, but the resulting excitation might be not enough for accurate estimation in the face of disturbances, e.g., local field potential deviations due to neuron firings. Better excitation is produced by input signals with designed Laguerre spectra. Due to the infeasibility of assigning electrical properties to the surroundings of the lead in vivo, synthetic data from an individualized high-fidelity mathematical model of DBS are used instead. The latter model is validated against clinically measured impedance values.
keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Conductivity;Lead;Brain modeling;Mathematical model;Electric potential;Deep brain stimulation (DBS);input design;neuromodulation;system identification},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8438303&isnumber=8944320


K. C. Veluvolu, S. Tatinati, S. M. Hong and W. T. Ang, "Multi-step prediction of physiological tremor for robotics applications," 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 5075-5078, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610689.Abstract: The performance of surgical robotic devices in real-time mainly depends on phase-delay in sensors and filtering process. A phase delay of 16-20 ms is unavoidable in these robotics procedures due to the presence of hardware low pass filter in sensors and pre-filtering required in later stages of cancellation. To overcome this phase delay, we employ multi-step prediction with band limited multiple Fourier linear combiner (BMFLC) and Autoregressive (AR) methods. Results show that the overall accuracy is improved by 60% for tremor estimation compared to single-step prediction methods in the presence of phase delay. Experimental results with the proposed methods for 1-DOF tremor estimation highlight the improvement. keywords: {Delays;Estimation;Accuracy;Adaptation models;Real-time systems;Sensors;Vectors},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6610689&isnumber=6609410

R. Cubo and A. Medvedev, "Individualization of a surrounding tissue model in deep brain stimulation," 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2017, pp. 5919-5924, doi: 10.1109/CDC.2017.8264555.Abstract: Deep Brain Stimulation is an established therapy that consists of sending mild electrical pulses to the brain via a surgically implanted electrode. It is used to treat the symptoms of neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's Disease and Essential Tremor. The stimulation effect is however patient-specific and difficult to predict. Further, impedance measurements indicate changes in the medium around the lead over time that are generally challenging to account for. Although mathematical models to characterize the extent of the stimulation have been developed in recent years, it is imperative that the model parameters are realistic enough to produce correct results. This study aims at developing a system identification approach to capture the changes in the medium around the lead by measuring the potential on non-active contacts during stimulation. Due to infeasibility of assigning properties to the medium around the lead in vivo, synthetic data are used for analysis instead. Results suggest that a transfer function with one zero and one pole that corresponds to a circuit composed of two RC contours in cascade is sufficient to describe the measurements in silico. Furthermore, the identified parameters show an injective relation to the properties of the medium. Continuous Least Squares and Laguerre domain identification are utilized for obtaining parameter estimates. keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Lead;Mathematical model;Conductivity;Brain modeling;Integrated circuit modeling},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8264555&isnumber=8263624

R. LeMoyne, N. Tomycz, T. Mastroianni, C. McCandless, M. Cozza and D. Peduto, "Implementation of a smartphone wireless accelerometer platform for establishing deep brain stimulation treatment efficacy of essential tremor with machine learning," 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 2015, pp. 6772-6775, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319948.Abstract: Essential tremor (ET) is a highly prevalent movement disorder. Patients with ET exhibit a complex progressive and disabling tremor, and medical management often fails. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been successfully applied to this disorder, however there has been no quantifiable way to measure tremor severity or treatment efficacy in this patient population. The quantified amelioration of kinetic tremor via DBS is herein demonstrated through the application of a smartphone (iPhone) as a wireless accelerometer platform. The recorded acceleration signal can be obtained at a setting of the subject's convenience and conveyed by wireless transmission through the Internet for post-processing anywhere in the world. Further post-processing of the acceleration signal can be classified through a machine learning application, such as the support vector machine. Preliminary application of deep brain stimulation with a smartphone for acquisition of a feature set and machine learning for classification has been successfully applied. The support vector machine achieved 100% classification between deep brain stimulation in `on' and `off' mode based on the recording of an accelerometer signal through a smartphone as a wireless accelerometer platform. keywords: {Accelerometers;Wireless communication;Acceleration;Brain stimulation;Support vector machines;Diseases;Wireless sensor networks;Essential Tremor;Deep Brain Stimulation;Smartphone;iPhone;Accelerometer;Wireless Accelerometer;Feedback;Support Vector Machine;Machine Learning},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7319948&isnumber=7318236

N. Khobragade, D. Tuninetti and D. Graupe, "On the need for adaptive learning in on-demand Deep Brain Stimulation for Movement Disorders," 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Honolulu, HI, USA, 2018, pp. 2190-2193, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2018.8512664.Abstract: The results presented in this paper indicate that future on-demand Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) systems for chronic use in patients with movement disorders should continuously and adaptively “learn” in order to maintain high symptom control efficacy. In this work, two machine learning algorithms-Decision Tree and LArge Memory STorage And Retrieval (LAMSTAR) neural network, both with surface Electromyography and accelerometry as control signals-are used to predict onset of tremor after DBS has been switched off in two patients, one suffering from Parkinson's disease and the other from essential tremor. The novelty of this work is that training and testing are done by using different data recorded during sessions at least one week apart. The question is whether the applied algorithms are robust to long-term operation (as patient's control signal may change over time due to disease progression, displacement of the wearable sensor, etc.). Various metrics are used to compare the performance of the proposed approach to those available in the literature, where training and testing are done on data from the same recording session. It is shown that a 100% sensitivity is achieved for training and testing over the same session; however, the sensitivity reduces when tested over a different session. The ratio of predicted stimulation-off time to observed stimulation-off time value is also found to be lower when training and testing on data from separate sessions. These results point to the need of adaptive learning in on-demand DBS systems. keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Testing;Training;Sensitivity;Accelerometers;Switches;Closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation;Tremor prediction;Movement disorders;Parkinson’s Disease;Essential Tremor;Accelerometer;Surface EMG},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8512664&isnumber=8512178

P. Gómez-Vilda et al., "Estimating Tremor in Vocal Fold Biomechanics for Neurological Disease Characterization," 2013 18th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), Fira, Greece, 2013, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICDSP.2013.6622735.Abstract: Neurological Diseases (ND) are affecting larger segments of aging population every year. Treatment is dependent on expensive accurate and frequent monitoring. It is well known that ND leave correlates in speech and phonation. The present work shows a method to detect alterations in vocal fold tension during phonation. These may appear either as hypertension or as cyclical tremor. Estimations of tremor may be produced by auto-regressive modeling of the vocal fold tension series in sustained phonation. The correlates obtained are a set of cyclicality coefficients, the frequency and the root mean square amplitude of the tremor. Statistical distributions of these correlates obtained from a set of male and female subjects are presented. Results from five study cases of female voice are also given. keywords: {Approximation methods;Biomechanics;Robustness;Artificial neural networks;Glottal Source;Parkinson's Disease;Voice Processing;e-Health Care in Aging},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6622735&isnumber=6622665

A. Kucukelbir, A. Kushki and K. N. Plataniotis, "A new stochastic estimator for tremor frequency tracking," 2009 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Taipei, Taiwan, 2009, pp. 421-424, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2009.4959610.Abstract: An important parameter in analysis of physiological tremor is the diagnosis and study of neurological disorders. The instantaneous tremor frequency (ITF) is an important parameter in tremor analysis. This paper proposes a novel stochastic filter, the multiple extended Kalman filter (M-EKF), for tracking of ITF from neural microelectrode recordings. The M-EKF mitigates degradations in filter performance resulting from a mismatch between assumed initial conditions and those of a particular realization of a stochastic system. Specifically, the M-EKF is comprised of a bank of extended Kalman filters (EKF), each initialized with different conditions, selected according to the unscented transform. The final estimate is a weighted average of the individual estimates provided by each EKF where the weights reflect how closely the assumed EKF initial conditions match those of the true system. The M-EKF is applied to a synthetic tremor model to display its superior performance to that of the EKF and the unscented Kalman filter. keywords: {Frequency estimation;Stochastic processes;State estimation;Stochastic systems;Stochastic resonance;Neural microtechnology;Degradation;Kalman filters;Filtering;Time measurement;Tremor frequency;state-space model;nonlinear estimation;unscented transform;extended Kalman filtering},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=4959610&isnumber=4959496

M. Heijmans, J. Habets, M. Kuijf, P. Kubben and C. Herff, "Evaluation of Parkinson’s Disease at Home: Predicting Tremor from Wearable Sensors," 2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Berlin, Germany, 2019, pp. 584-587, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2019.8857717.Abstract: The continuous monitoring of Parkinsons's disease (PD) symptoms would allow to automatically adjust medication or deep brain stimulation parameters to a patient's momentary condition. Wearable sensors have been proposed to monitor PD symptoms and have been validated in a number of lab and hospital settings. However, taking these sensors into the daily life of patients introduces a number of difficulties, most notably the absence of an observable ground truth of what the user is currently doing. In this pilot study, we investigate PD symptoms by combining wearable sensors on both wrist and the chest with a questionnaire based evaluation of PD symptoms, in the form of experience sampling method. For a tremor dominant patient, we show that experienced tremor severity can be predicted from the sensor data with correlations of up to r = 0.43. We evaluated different window lengths to calculate the features in and see better results for longer window lengths. Our results show that continuous monitoring of PD symptoms in daily life is feasible using wearable sensors. keywords: {Feature extraction;Correlation;Monitoring;Wearable sensors;Accelerometers;Data mining},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8857717&isnumber=8856280

J. Lin, Z. Liu and J. Lai, "Wavelet Broad Learning Filter: A Novel Adaptive Filter for estimating the Physiological Tremor in Teleoperation," 2018 International Conference on Security, Pattern Analysis, and Cybernetics (SPAC), Jinan, China, 2018, pp. 354-359, doi: 10.1109/SPAC46244.2018.8965489.Abstract: In this paper, a wavelet broad learning filter is proposed to estimate the tremor. At first, the structure of original broad learning system (BLS) is redesigned. To extract the features of tremor, the novel WBLAF maps each dimensional data as the feature nodes respectively by the wavelet function. Secondly, a novel self-paced wavelet auto-encoder (SPWAE) is proposed to train the weights of feature mapping. In addition, the ridge regression learning algorithm and the incremental learning of the proposed filter are applied to learning online. Finally, semiphysical simulation experiment is accomplished. As shown in the results, the new proposed WBLAF can effectively estimate and filter out the physiological tremor in tele-operation. keywords: {Learning systems;Incremental learning;Adaptive filters;Estimation;Filtering algorithms;Feature extraction;Wavelet analysis;Physiology;Security;Pattern analysis;adaptive filter;wavelet broad learning adaptive filter(WBLAF);self-paced wavelet auto-encoder(SPWAE)},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8965489&isnumber=8965430

K. Gong et al., "Real-Time Tremor Monitoring and Estimation Using Multisensor Fusion for Wearable Active Suppression Systems," in IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 74, pp. 1-13, 2025, Art no. 4021913, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2025.3643067.
Abstract: Active tremor suppression devices have emerged as an essential treatment option alongside medication and surgical interventions for Parkinson’s disease (PD). Rapid and accurate extraction of hand tremor signal features from PD patients is crucial for the effective operation of such devices. However, existing tremor signal monitoring schemes are limited by large real-time errors, high information redundancy, and bulky equipment, hindering practical applications. This study first employed multiple inertial measurement units (IMUs) and a myoelectric armband to perform multidimensional tremor data acquisition on PD patients. Based on the analysis and dimensionality reduction of multisensor data, the sensor layout was optimized, resulting in a lightweight and wearable monitoring module for active tremor suppression devices. Using the optimized monitoring module, additional tremor data were collected, and an electromyography (EMG)-guided real-time tremor estimation algorithm was proposed and validated. This algorithm not only improves the real-time prediction accuracy of tremor motion data but also enables real-time recognition of tremor states, enhancing the robustness of monitoring. Experimental results show that the algorithm achieves a real-time estimation accuracy of 81.72% for PD tremor data. Compared to non-EMG-guided estimation schemes, the real-time estimation error is reduced by 34.35%. This study analyzes the hand characteristics of resting tremors in PD and introduces a novel and practical software–hardware integrated solution, laying a solid foundation for wearable monitoring, diagnosis, and the development of advanced medical rehabilitation robots with active tremor suppression capabilities.
keywords: {Monitoring;Real-time systems;Biomedical monitoring;Hands;Accuracy;Estimation;Electromyography;Wearable devices;Muscles;Data acquisition;Multisensor fusion;Parkinson’s disease (PD);real-time estimation algorithm;tremor monitoring;wearable devices},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11298375&isnumber=10764799


J. Forde, M. Shuqair, J. Jimenez-Shahed and B. Ghoraani, "Transformer Neural Network for Estimating Tremor Severity in Parkinson’s Disease During Daily Living Activities," 2025 47th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Copenhagen, Denmark, 2025, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/EMBC58623.2025.11251605.Abstract: This study addresses a critical gap in the digital monitoring of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) by introducing an innovative Transformer Neural Network with Multi-Head Self-Attention to predict tremor severity from raw gyroscope data captured by wearable sensors. The model incorporates a convolutional layer for spatio-temporal feature extraction, sinusoidal positional encoding to preserve sequence information, and self-attention mechanisms to capture both short- and long-term dependencies in the data. Supervised learning was conducted using leave-one-out cross-validation on a dataset of preprocessed signals from 24 PD patients performing activities of daily living, with tremor scores annotated by neurologists. The results show that the Transformer outperforms conventional recurrent deep learning approaches, achieving a lower error rate and a robust correlation (r=0.90 vs. 0.83) between predicted and actual tremor scores. Attention weight analyses further revealed the model’s ability to discern complex patterns in the input signals, providing enhanced interpretability compared to recurrent models. These findings demonstrate the significant potential of Transformer-based architectures for biomedical time-series signal monitoring, enabling impactful, timely interventions for improved outcomes.Clinical Relevance—Infrequent and unreliable evaluations have complicated the management of Parkinson’s Disease (PD). This study demonstrates how transformer neural networks process wearable sensor signals to provide accurate monitoring of PD, guide data-driven therapeutic decision-making, and improve patient outcomes. keywords: {Deep learning;Correlation;Biological system modeling;Transformers;Encoding;Gyroscopes;Monitoring;Biological neural networks;Wearable sensors;Diseases},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11251605&isnumber=11251526

B. W. Robinson, D. Hernandez-Garduno and M. Saquib, "Fixed and Floating-Point Implementations of Linear Adaptive Techniques for Predicting Physiological Hand Tremor in Microsurgery," in IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 659-667, June 2010, doi: 10.1109/JSTSP.2010.2048240.
Abstract: This paper presents the fixed and floating-point implementations for field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) of third-order hand tremor predictors using recursive-least square (RLS) and a proposed Kalman adaptation algorithm. The proposed algorithm outperforms RLS in convergence speed and mean square error (MSE). It also shows better numerical convergence than the RLS as the number of bits in fixed-point precision is reduced. Both fixed and floating-point realizations are implemented and the hardware tradeoffs are discussed. A modified binary floating-point format is proposed that takes advantage of the 18-bit hard macro multiplier within the Virtex 5 Architecture in order to gain precision while preserving clock speed. The increased precision overcomes the prior known issues of explosive divergence and the stalling effect associated with the fixed-point implementation of such adaptive algorithms, proving the feasibility of an FPGA based physiological hand tremor predictor. In order to demonstrate the tradeoff between the performance and the hardware complexity, we quantify the penalty paid by the system in terms of MSE due to the use of lower precision arithmetic.
keywords: {Microsurgery;Surgery;Field programmable gate arrays;Resonance light scattering;Hardware;Adaptive arrays;Kalman filters;Mean square error methods;Convergence of numerical methods;Clocks;Adaptive filters;autoregressive (AR);field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs);fixed-point arithmetic;floating-point arithmetic;hand tremor;Kalman;recursive least-squares},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5447636&isnumber=5464447


L. Zhang, S. Guo and C. Yang, "Prediction of Physiological Tremor Based on Deep Learning for Vascular Interventional Surgery Robot," 2021 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), Takamatsu, Japan, 2021, pp. 1339-1344, doi: 10.1109/ICMA52036.2021.9512713.Abstract: Physiological tremor seriously affects the operation accuracy of the master-slave vascular interventional surgery robot (VISR), which is very necessary to be eliminated. However, there are some issues in the existing methods. For instant, some methods require the prior knowledge of the prediction horizon for accurate estimation tremor signal. Furthermore, these methods assume the process to be nonstationary in the given prediction horizon. Besides, the phase delay of the system has a great influence on the performance of the surgical operating system. Therefore, the effective tremor signal compensation that can be used to generate the reverse motion signal in real time is needed. The paper proposes a multi-step signal prediction method based on LSTM. Combined with the existing method, the deep learning method improves the accuracy of tremor prediction compared with the other prediction method. keywords: {Deep learning;Mechatronics;Operating systems;Surgery;Prediction methods;Master-slave;Prediction algorithms;Physiological Tremor;multistep prediction;Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM);vascular interventional surgery robot (VISR)},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9512713&isnumber=9512569

Jing Zhang and Fang Chu, "Real-time modeling and prediction of physiological hand tremor," Proceedings. (ICASSP '05). IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2005., Philadelphia, PA, 2005, pp. v/645-v/648 Vol. 5, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2005.1416386.Abstract: This paper provides results of our investigation of adaptive algorithms for real-time modeling and prediction of physiological tremor signals. The goal of the investigation is to find effective methods which are suitable for small embedded systems used in real-time signal processing of physiological hand tremor. Our investigation shows that physiological hand tremor can be represented with an AR(3) process. Based on this fact, it is possible to identify the model of the physiological hand tremor with simple adaptive algorithms. On the other hand an adaptive linear predictor can also be realized, based on the same adaptive algorithms, which is significant for the suppression of physiological hand tremor in hand-held tools. keywords: {Predictive models;Biomedical monitoring;Digital signal processing chips;System testing;Communication system control;Signal processing algorithms;Frequency;Adaptive algorithm;Embedded system;Real time systems},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1416386&isnumber=30654

G. Rigas et al., "Tremor UPDRS estimation in home environment," 2016 38th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL, USA, 2016, pp. 3642-3645, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591517.Abstract: In this paper, a method for the assessment of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating scale (UPDRS) related to tremor is presented. The method described consists of hand resting and posture state detection, tremor detection and tremor quantification based on accelerometer and gyroscope readings from a wrist worn sensor. The initial results on PD patient recordings on home environment indicate the feasibility of the proposed method in monitoring UPDRS tremor in patient home environment. keywords: {Gyroscopes;Accelerometers;Wrist;Estimation;Feature extraction;Amplitude estimation;Cutoff frequency},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7591517&isnumber=7590615

E. C. Mengüҫ and N. Rezayi, "Estimation of Pathological Hand Tremor Signals by Fourier Linear Combiner Based Online Censoring LMS Algorithm," 2019 27th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU), Sivas, Turkey, 2019, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/SIU.2019.8806387.Abstract: In this paper, the FLC based OCLMS algorithm is proposed for the estimation of pathological hand tremor signals. The proposed FLC-OCLMS algorithm has been tested on the well-known pathological hand tremor signals in the literature and its convergence and computational complexity performances are compared with that of the classical FLC-LMS algorithm. Simulation results show that the proposed FLC-OCLMS algorithm has significantly reduced computational complexity because it does not use unnecessary data in the update rule thanks to the online data censoring technique and has a similar convergence with the conventional LMS algorithm. keywords: {Pathology;Estimation;Convergence;Computational complexity;Adaptation models;Dogs;Finite impulse response filters;Online consoring LMS algorithm;Fourier linear combiner;estimation of hand tremor},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8806387&isnumber=8806230

L. Cnockaert, F. Grenez and J. Schoentgen, "Fundamental frequency estimation and vocal tremor analysis by means of Morlet wavelet transforms," Proceedings. (ICASSP '05). IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2005., Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2005, pp. I/393-I/396 Vol. 1, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2005.1415133.Abstract: A vocal frequency estimation method and an analysis of vocal tremor are proposed. Vocal tremor is a narrow-band low-frequency perturbation of the vocal frequency. The vocal frequency estimate is the instantaneous frequency calculated in an automatically selected frequency-band of a wavelet transform of the speech signal. The vocal frequency estimation method is compared to an event-based method and a Hilbert-transform method for speech signals. The tremor frequency and amplitude are obtained by means of a continuous wavelet transform applied to the instantaneous frequency trace. The proposed analysis has been applied to parkinsonian and normophonic speakers. The results suggest that the vocal tremor features differ for both groups. keywords: {Frequency estimation;Wavelet analysis;Wavelet transforms;Continuous wavelet transforms;Signal analysis;Narrowband;Laboratories;Frequency measurement;Speech processing;Feature extraction},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1415133&isnumber=30650

O. Geman and I. Chiuchisan, "Response Surface Model Prediction of Deep Brain Stimulation Applied in Parkinson’s Disease Tremor," 2018 International Conference and Exposition on Electrical And Power Engineering (EPE), Iasi, Romania, 2018, pp. 0703-0707, doi: 10.1109/ICEPE.2018.8559610.Abstract: Tremor is a less investigated process/symptom of the human body. From a medical point of view, tremor is currently being assessed by empirical techniques, and a clear characterization of this signal doesn’t exist. The only existing results are pathological situations, for example in Parkinson’s disease where exists a criterion for evaluating Parkinson’s tremors by frequency, spectral character, location, amplitude, etc., but which prove to be vague and qualitative. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a neurosurgical procedure involving the implantation of a medical device called a neurostimulator, which sends electrical impulses through implanted electrodes, to specific targets in the brain (brain nuclei) for the treatment of movement and neuropsychiatric disorders. The Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is a set of mathematical and statistical techniques that explore the relationship between independent and variable-response variables in order to optimize the desired response of the investigated system to explore optimal operating conditions. Some theoretical aspects and results on the application of RSM in the optimization of the DBS procedure appropriate for patients with Parkinsonian tremor, are presented in this paper. keywords: {Neurological diseases;Power engineering;Pathology;Statistical analysis;Deep brain stimulation;Predictive models;Mathematical models;Response surface methodology;Surface treatment;Optimization;tremor;deep brain stimulation;Parkinson’s;disease;response surface methodology;prediction},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8559610&isnumber=8559599

S. S. Cooper, B. I. Ferleger, A. L. Ko, J. A. Herron and H. J. Chizeck, "Rebound effect in deep brain stimulation for essential tremor and symptom severity estimation from neural data," 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2020, pp. 3621-3624, doi: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175908.Abstract: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a safe and established treatment for essential tremor (ET). However, there remains considerable room for improvement due to concerns associated with the initial implant surgery, semi-regular revision surgeries for battery replacements, and side effects including paresthesia, gait ataxia, and emotional disinhibition that have been associated with continuous, or conventional, DBS (cDBS) treatment. Adaptive DBS (aDBS) seeks to ameliorate some of these concerns by using feedback from either an external wearable or implanted sensor to modulate stimulation parameters as needed. aDBS has been demonstrated to be as or more effective than cDBS, but the purely binary control system most commonly deployed by aDBS systems likely still provides sub-optimal treatment and may introduce new issues. One example of these issues is rebound effect, in which the tremor symptoms of an ET patient receiving DBS therapy temporarily worsen after cessation of stimulation before leveling out to a steady state. Here is presented a quantitative analysis of rebound effect in 3 patients receiving DBS for ET. Rebound was evident in all 3 patients by both clinical assessment and inertial measurement unit data, peaking by the latter at Tp = 6.65 minutes after cessation of stimulation. Using features extracted from neural data, linear regression was applied to predict tremor severity, with Ravg2 = 0.82. These results strongly suggest that rebound effect and the additional information made available by rebound effect should be considered and exploited when designing novel aDBS systems. keywords: {Task analysis;Satellite broadcasting;Feature extraction;Spirals;Steady-state;Estimation;Control systems},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9175908&isnumber=9175149

G. Yongsheng, Z. Jie, L. Junqiang and Y. Bo, "SBMFLC Algorithm for Pre-estimation and Filtering of Human Tremor," 2011 Third International Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, Shanghai, China, 2011, pp. 206-209, doi: 10.1109/ICMTMA.2011.622.Abstract: To suppress human tremor, researchers in this field devote themselves to develop a wearable tremor-suppression orthosis, but one of the most important difficulties lies in how to obtain real-time filtering and estimation of the tremor from the input signal. In this article, Fourier Linear Combiner(FLC) and a series of derived algorithms are analyzed first, then an improved algorithm-Shifted Band-limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner(SBMFLC) is proposed. Simulation results make it clear that the improved algorithm is more adaptive and accurate to the tremor suppression. keywords: {Humans;Band pass filters;Power harmonic filters;Harmonic analysis;Time frequency analysis;Algorithm design and analysis;Human tremor;Pre-estimation and Filtering;Fourier Linear Combiner(FLC);Shifted Band-limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (SBMFLC)},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5721459&isnumber=5721408

T. Murata, K. Sakurada, T. Tsuji and Y. Kurita, "Prediction of posture-dependent tremor by the calculation of the endpoint compliance," 2016 38th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL, USA, 2016, pp. 2169-2172, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591159.Abstract: This paper proposes to use the analysis of human mechanical impedance to predict spatial behavior of tremor. Traditional studies have revealed that the variability in force is proportional to the mean level of force generated, which is described as signal dependent noise. The variability in force sometimes generates unintentional and uncontrollable rhythmic muscle movements, called tremor. Tremor appears most commonly on arms and hands due to not only a symptom of a neurological disorder, but also when we tighten our muscles. This study hypothesizes that the posture-dependent tremor at the hand is affected by the mechanical impedance of the arm, which is represented as the endpoint compliance ellipsoid. To verify this hypothesis, we measured the trajectory of the endpoint of the arm by human experiments, and compared the results with the endpoint compliance ellipsoid computationally obtained. The human experiment where the oscillations at the hand are measured revealed that the simulation results well correspond with the human experiments. This suggests that the posture-dependent motion noise is affected by the mechanical impedance of human body. keywords: {Muscles;Ellipsoids;Force;Impedance;Mathematical model;Jacobian matrices;Trajectory},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7591159&isnumber=7590615

S. Tatinati, K. C. Veluvolu and W. T. Ang, "Autoregressive model with Kalman filter for estimation of physiological tremor in surgical robotic applications," 2011 11th International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems, Gyeonggi-do, Korea (South), 2011, pp. 454-459.Abstract: In real-time implementation computational complexity plays vital role. This paper focuses on adaptive signal processing of physiological hand tremor for tremor cancellation in robotic devices. The physiological tremor is modelled with AR(3) process that has less computational complexity compared to other model based existing methods. In this paper, filter coefficients are updated with Kalman filter to improve the performance. The existing method AR-LMS and the improved method AR-Kalman are implemented in real-time for tremor compensation. A comparative study is conducted on the algorithms with the tremor data from microsurgeons and novice subjects. Experimental results shows that the proposed method AR with Kalman filter improves the accuracy by at least 10% in real-time compared to AR with LMS. keywords: {Kalman filters;Surgery;Real time systems;Accuracy;Adaptation models;Least squares approximation;Estimation;tremor;inertial sensors;AR modelling;Kalman filter;real-time estimation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6106405&isnumber=6106068

S. Tatinati, K. C. Veluvolu and W. T. Ang, "Multistep Prediction of Physiological Tremor Based on Machine Learning for Robotics Assisted Microsurgery," in IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 328-339, Feb. 2015, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2014.2381495.
Abstract: For effective tremor compensation in robotics assisted hand-held device, accurate filtering of tremulous motion is necessary. The time-varying unknown phase delay that arises due to both software (filtering) and hardware (sensors) in these robotics instruments adversely affects the device performance. In this paper, moving window-based least squares support vector machines approach is formulated for multistep prediction of tremor to overcome the time-varying delay. This approach relies on the kernel-learning technique and does not require the knowledge of prediction horizon compared to the existing methods that require the delay to be known as a priori. The proposed method is evaluated through simulations and experiments with the tremor data recorded from surgeons and novice subjects. Comparison with the state-of-the-art techniques highlights the suitability and better performance of the proposed method.
keywords: {Delays;Training;Physiology;Accuracy;Robots;Microsurgery;Least squares support vector machines (LS-SVM);multistep prediction;physiological motions;tremor;Least squares support vector machines (LS-SVM);multistep prediction;physiological motions;tremor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6998844&isnumber=7008577


C. R. Kelley and J. L. Kauffman, "Optimal Control Perspective on Parkinson’s Disease: Increased Delay Between State Estimator and Controller Produces Tremor," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2144-2152, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2020.3018626.
Abstract: Parkinson's disease produces tremor in a large subset of patients despite generally inhibiting movement. The pathophysiology of parkinsonian tremor is unclear, leading to uncertainty in how and why treatments reduce tremor with varying effectiveness. Models for parkinsonian tremor attempt to explain the underlying principles of tremor generation in the central nervous system, often focusing on neural activity of specific substructures. In contrast, control system approaches to modeling the human motor system provide qualitative results that help inform conclusions from clinical studies. This article uses an optimal control approach to investigate the hypothesis that an increased delay in the central nervous system-unaccounted by delay compensation mechanisms-produces parkinsonian tremor. This hypothesis is motivated by the excessive inhibition projected from the basal ganglia to the thalamus in Parkinson's disease. The thalamus relays signals from the cerebellum to the primary motor cortex: previous mapping of optimal control components indicates this prospective delay exists between the estimator (cerebellum) and controller (primary motor cortex). Simulations demonstrate realistic tremor in a neuromuscular model of the wrist. In addition, changes to effort sensitivity in the optimal controller may account for some clinical features of parkinsonian tremor, including the characteristics of re-emergent tremor and the time-varying amplitude and frequency of tremor. Contextualization of the optimal control model with physiological models and clinical observations provides insight into the potential role of the basal ganglia and cerebello-thalamo-cortical circuit and how treatments like dopaminergic medications and deep brain stimulation reduce tremor.
keywords: {Delays;Basal ganglia;Optimal control;Motor drives;Thalamus;Brain modeling;Cerebellum;Feedback delay;human motor control;optimal control;Parkinson’s disease;tremor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9173694&isnumber=9216637


Y. Ye et al., "A Noise-Resistant 3D Hand Motion Estimator Framework for Parkinson's Tremor Assessment," 2025 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), Wuhan, China, 2025, pp. 3143-3148, doi: 10.1109/BIBM66473.2025.11357216.Abstract: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, with tremor being one of its representative motor symptoms. Current clinical evaluations primarily rely on subjective scales such as the MDS-UPDRS, which often introduce significant inter-rater variability. Although vision-based evaluation offers objective motion analysis, existing pose tracking frameworks struggle with accurate tremor quantification due to inter-frame jitter and limited precision, failing to capture fine-grained spatiotemporal dynamics. To address this, we propose Motion-aware Hierarchical Grouping Mamba Network (MHG-Mamba), a non-contact video-based framework for automated evaluation of the 'finger-to-nose' task. Our approach first employs feature extraction to decouple high-degree-of-freedom finger joint movements from stable palm joint motions, enabling accurate finger pose estimation. Second, by incorporating with the hierarchical spatiotemporal scanning mechanism in Mamba's SSM, the model captures global motion features while preserving anatomical constraints, resulting in a temporally smooth and plausible skeletal sequence. Finally, based on the predicted skeletal sequences, we introduce several objective metrics to quantify motion features and apply a classifier for precise objective severity rating. Experimental results demonstrate that MHG-Mamba significantly improves the accuracy of 3D hand pose estimation and reduces noise in the motion sequences. The system achieved a classification accuracy of 93.2 % on the 'finger-to-nose' task. Moreover, clinicians using our system exhibited reduced variability in their assessments, highlighting its high clinical value. keywords: {Hands;Visualization;Accuracy;Three-dimensional displays;Tracking;Parkinson's disease;Pose estimation;Noise;Real-time systems;Spatiotemporal phenomena;Parkinson's disease;Tremors;3D hand pose estimation;Mamba;MDS-UPDRS},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11357216&isnumber=11355975

S. M. Ali et al., "Wearable Accelerometer and Gyroscope Sensors for Estimating the Severity of Essential Tremor," in IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, vol. 12, pp. 194-203, 2024, doi: 10.1109/JTEHM.2023.3329344.
Abstract: Background: Several validated clinical scales measure the severity of essential tremor (ET). Their assessments are subjective and can depend on familiarity and training with scoring systems. Method: We propose a multi-modal sensing using a wearable inertial measurement unit for estimating scores on the Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale (FTM) and determine the classification accuracy within the tremor type. 17 ET participants and 18 healthy controls were recruited for the study. Two movement disorder neurologists who were blinded to prior clinical information viewed video recordings and scored the FTM. Participants drew a guided Archimedes spiral while wearing an inertial measurement unit placed at the mid-point between the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the anatomical snuff box. Acceleration and gyroscope recordings were analyzed. The ratio of the power spectral density between frequency bands 0.5-4 Hz and 4–12 Hz, and the sum of power spectrum density over the entire spectrum of 2–74 Hz, for both accelerometer and gyroscope data, were computed. FTM was estimated using regression model and classification using SVM was validated using the leave-one-out method. Results: Regression analysis showed a moderate to good correlation when individual features were used, while correlation was high ( $r^{2}$  = 0.818) when suitable features of the gyro and accelerometer were combined. The accuracy for two-class classification of the combined features using SVM was 91.42% while for four-class it was 68.57%. Conclusion: Potential applications of this novel wearable sensing method using a wearable Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) include monitoring of ET and clinical trials of new treatments for the disorder.
keywords: {Accelerometers;Gyroscopes;Sensors;Wearable sensors;Spirals;Recording;Biomedical monitoring;Essential tremor;Fahn-Tolosa-Marin tremor rating scale;wearables;inertial measurement unit},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10304233&isnumber=10325338


J. R. Bhatnagar, J. Sabu, J. Sharma and H. Sharma, "A Framework for Estimating Hand Strength from Grip and Tremor," 2024 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence For Internet of Things (AIIoT), Vellore, India, 2024, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/AIIoT58432.2024.10574664.Abstract: Human fingers supported by palm area act as interfaces to perform various actions with real world. Grip and tremor are physiological phenomena associated with the human hand that exhibit dependence on various health issues. In this paper, Electro Tactile Gram (ETG) is proposed as sensory setup capable of measuring grip and tremor. It comprises of piezo sensor discs mounted on mouse shaped substrate that is referred to as Clinical Mouse (CM). Five sensors are fixed on CM surface by pegging finger-tip locations acquired from different hand sizes. The CM acquires static voltage measurement for grip and dynamic voltage measurement for tremor. Experiments performed with 8 healthy users depict noticeable difference between tight and hold postures for grip, when fingers are placed one at a time on pegged locations on the CM. Likewise, we formulate tremor in terms of features such as max-min variation of voltage and frequency by applying one finger at a time on CM. The grip statistics is estimated from 8 users and covers max, min and average for hold and tight postures. All chosen test subjects are healthy men in age group of 30 – 40 years, who use their hands to perform light job such as data entry from keyboard. Similarly, max, min trends of peak - to - peak voltage and frequency are also observed for tremor data from 4 healthy users. The proposed ETG framework offers first of its kind, robust and low-cost setup conjectured for use in clinical applications based on hand strength. keywords: {Time-frequency analysis;Voltage measurement;Piezoelectric transducers;Keyboards;Minimax techniques;Market research;Physiology;Clinical Mouse;Grip;Tremor;Hand Strength;Bio-medical},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10574664&isnumber=10574536

B. Taheri, D. Case and E. Richer, "Adaptive Suppression of Severe Pathological Tremor by Torque Estimation Method," in IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 717-727, April 2015, doi: 10.1109/TMECH.2014.2317948.
Abstract: Tremor is a rhythmical and involuntary oscillatory movement of a body part. In addition to social embarrassment, tremor can be debilitating for daily activities. Recently, wearable active exoskeletons emerged as a noninvasive tremor suppression alternative to medication or surgery. The challenge in musculoskeletal tremor suppression is identifying and attenuating the tremor motion without adding resistance to the patient's intentional motion. In this research, an adaptive tremor suppression algorithm was designed to estimate the tremor fundamental frequency and calculate the proper suppressive force to be applied by the orthosis to the patient's arm. Stability of the closed-loop system and robustness against the parametric uncertainties were analyzed. An experimental setup was designed and developed to emulate the dynamics of a human wrist with intentional and tremor motion. A pneumatic cylinder and a sliding mode integral controller was used to apply orthotic suppressive force. The algorithm was implemented with an NI cRIO real-time controller and tested using clinical data from ten patients with severe pathological tremor. Experimental results showed tracking of the tremor frequency with less than 3-s response time, and an average 34.5 dB (98.1%) and 11.8 dB (74.3%) reduction of tremor amplitude at the fundamental and second-harmonic frequencies, respectively. The average resistance force to the intentional motion was 0.7 N and the average position error was 2.08% (0.18 dB). The results were compared with passive tremor suppression using a tunable magnetorheological damper.
keywords: {Torque;Joints;Force;Frequency estimation;Muscles;Harmonic analysis;Heuristic algorithms;Adaptive control;exoskeletons;nonlinear robust control;pneumatic actuators;tremor suppression;Adaptive control;exoskeletons;nonlinear robust control;pneumatic actuators;tremor suppression},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6813662&isnumber=6936399


A. P. L. Bó, P. Poignet and C. Geny, "Pathological Tremor and Voluntary Motion Modeling and Online Estimation for Active Compensation," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 177-185, April 2011, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2010.2091283.
Abstract: This paper presents an algorithm to perform online tremor characterization from motion sensors measurements, while filtering the voluntary motion performed by the patient. In order to estimate simultaneously both nonstationary signals in a stochastic filtering framework, pathological tremor was represented by a time-varying harmonic model and voluntary motion was modeled as an auto-regressive moving-average (ARMA) model. Since it is a nonlinear problem, an extended Kalman filter (EKF) was used. The developed solution was evaluated with simulated signals and experimental data from patients with different pathologies. Also, the results were comprehensively compared with alternative techniques proposed in the literature, evidencing the better performance of the proposed method. The algorithm presented in this paper may be an important tool in the design of active tremor compensation systems.
keywords: {Sensors;Estimation;Pathology;Harmonic analysis;Noise;Frequency estimation;Adaptation model;Active tremor compensation;extended kalman filter;motion sensors;pathological tremor;voluntary motion},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5628272&isnumber=5745718


S. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Zhao, T. Yang and Y. Zhu, "Prediction of sEMG-based tremor joint angle using the RBF neural network," 2012 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, Chengdu, China, 2012, pp. 2103-2108, doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2012.6285668.Abstract: Pathological tremor includes many types and affects person's normal life. To suppress the tremor, the medical drugs or auxiliary exoskeleton system were applied. The amplitude and frequency of tremor movement were crucial to effective suppression by exoskeleton system. In this study, base on the drawback of the kinematic information and the relationship between surface electromyographic (sEMG) signals and muscle activations, the prediction of angle from sEMG signals by using network was proposed and realized, avoiding establishing a complex mathematical model to describe the angular displacement. Comparing the sEMG captured from tremor with the normal signals, the linear profile-curve of sEMG was extracted as a feature value, and the relationship model between joint angle and sEMG was constructed by the radial basis function neural network (RBF). The analysis of the experimental data showed that the linear profile-curve could be used to predict the angle or angular velocity, with higher accuracy and adaptability comparing with root mean square (RMS) of EMG. keywords: {Training;Joints;Feature extraction;Muscles;Electromyography;Radial basis function networks;Testing;Pathological tremor;sEMG;Linear Profile-curve;RBF Network},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6285668&isnumber=6282333

A. Haddock, A. Velisar, J. Herron, H. Bronte-Stewart and H. J. Chizeck, "Model predictive control of deep brain stimulation for Parkinsonian tremor," 2017 8th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), Shanghai, China, 2017, pp. 358-362, doi: 10.1109/NER.2017.8008364.Abstract: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an established therapy for a variety of neurological disorders, including Parkinson's disease, essential tremor, and dystonia. Recent DBS research has pursued methods for closed-loop control to provide more effective management of symptoms, side effects, and device power consumption. Most closed-loop DBS (CLDBS) studies to date use simple threshold-based controllers to trigger DBS and, as a result, any optimization of symptoms and device power consumption is only incident. In this paper, we demonstrate the utility of an approach based on identifying patient-specific models of symptom response to DBS and using these models to formulate a model predictive control strategy for CLDBS, which explicitly solves an optimization problem. We simulate the model predictive controller for various parameters and find that this approach yields a range of performances for the competing objectives of minimizing patient symptoms and device power consumption. We examine this fundamental tradeoff using the concept of Pareto optimality and conclude with a discussion about incorporating patient, clinician, and other stakeholder preferences in the design of CLDBS systems. keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Switches;Biological system modeling;Data models;Predictive models;Predictive control;Optimization},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8008364&isnumber=8008262

L. Ferrigno et al., "A real-time tracking system for tremor and trajectory estimation in Parkinson’s disease affected patients," 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Medical Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), Bari, Italy, 2020, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/MeMeA49120.2020.9137210.Abstract: The paper proposes a first step toward the realization of a low cost and scalable clinical device to monitor the evolution of Parkinson’s disease based on magnetic measurements. The main aim of the overall research project is the realization of an Internet-connected device able to allow the execution of standardized tests and to share results with specialized medical centers. At this stage, the system has been focused on two parameters useful for medical exams: tremor and hands trajectory. This paper describes the realized set-up based on fixed receiving coils and one mobile transmitting coil. It reports preliminary experimental results based on a robotic arm adopted as a reference. Obtained results clearly show the capability of the realized system to accurately estimate both the tremor frequency and the hand trajectory, even if high levels of tremor are applied. keywords: {Coils;Costs;Estimation;Magnetic variables measurement;Trajectory;Software measurement;Biomedical monitoring;Parkinson’s disease;Positioning;vibration;measurement systems;distributed measurement systems},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9137210&isnumber=9137109

Z. Leng, J. Chen, H. P. H. Shum, F. W. B. Li and X. Liang, "Stable Hand Pose Estimation under Tremor via Graph Neural Network," 2021 IEEE Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), Lisboa, Portugal, 2021, pp. 226-234, doi: 10.1109/VR50410.2021.00044.Abstract: Hand pose estimation, which predicts the spatial location of hand joints, is a fundamental task in VR/AR applications. Although existing methods can recover hand pose competently, the tremor issue occurring in hand motion has not been completely solved. Tremor is an involuntary motion accompanied by a desired gesture or hand motion, leading to hand pose that deviates from user's intentions. Considering the characteristic of tremor motion, we present a novel Graph Neural Network for stable 3D hand pose estimation. The input is depth images. The constraint adjacency matrix is devised in Graph Neural Network for dynamically adjusting the topology of a hand graph during message passing and aggregation. Firstly, since there are rich potential constraints among hand joints, we utilize the constraint adjacency matrix to mine the suitable topology, modeling spatial-temporal constraints of joints and outputting the precise tremor hand pose as the pre-estimation result. Then, for obtaining a stable hand pose, we provide a tremor compensation module based on the constraint adjacency matrix, which exploits the constraint between control points and tremor hand pose. Concretely, the control points represented the voluntary motion are employed as constraints to edit the tremor hand pose. Our extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments show that the proposed method has achieved decent performance for 3D tremor hand pose estimation. keywords: {Training;Human computer interaction;Three-dimensional displays;Network topology;Message passing;Pose estimation;Virtual reality;Computing methodologies-Artificial intelligence-Computer vision-Computer vision problems;Human-centered computing-Human computer interaction-Interaction techniques-Gestural input},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9417666&isnumber=9417648

B. C. Becker, R. A. MacLachlan and C. N. Riviere, "State estimation and feedforward tremor suppression for a handheld micromanipulator with a Kalman filter," 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 5160-5165, doi: 10.1109/IROS.2011.6094935.Abstract: Active compensation of physiological tremor for handheld micromanipulators depends on fast control and actuation responses. Because of real-world latencies, real-time compensation is usually not completely effective at eliminating unwanted hand motion. By modeling tremor, more effective cancellation is possible by anticipating future hand motion. We propose a feedforward control strategy that utilizes tremor velocity from a state-estimating Kalman filter. We demonstrate that estimating hand motion in a feedforward controller overcomes real-world latencies in micromanipulator actuation. In hold-still tasks with a fully handheld micromanipulator, the proposed feedforward approach improves tremor rejection by over 50%. keywords: {Kalman filters;Feedforward neural networks;Micromanipulators;Surgery;Actuators;Instruments},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6094935&isnumber=6094399

S. Swami, K. P. SJ and M. K. S, "Detection and Prediction of Neurological Disorder Using Tremor Signals and Machine Learning Algorithms," 2021 International Conference on Recent Trends on Electronics, Information, Communication & Technology (RTEICT), Bangalore, India, 2021, pp. 43-50, doi: 10.1109/RTEICT52294.2021.9573755.Abstract: Latest research studies have indicated that more than seven million people in the worldwide and one million people in the United States have been affected by the common neuro degenerative disorder defined as Parkinson's disease. This disease is more evident in aged people who are a formidable population around the globe. Parkinson's disease (PD) is a continuous growing disease of nervous system that affects largely the regular daily activities and impedes movement of the person. The symptoms of PD patients may vary across geography and communities. Proper and timely Parkinson's disease diagnosis and prediction is an innovative research in medicine. In existent clinical diagnosis as practiced by doctors globally, One of the diagnosing methods is to study tremor signals. Tremor assessments methods include computerized tremor analysis, clinical assessment of drawn figures, standardized rating scales and simple clinical observations. To cater purpose of a clinical research, various rating scales has been developed which suit patient's population. One of the earlier scale used is to measure tremor is Fahn- Tolosa-Marin Tremor Rating Scale (TRS). This is 5-point scale which rates tremor severity predicted from its amplitude, from 0 (no tremor) to 4 (serious tremor) in each part of the body. Primary objective of work under taken is to develop a tremor detection prototype using Raspberry Pi processor equipped with accelerometer and flex sensors. Neurological tremor thus collected from this module is used to build dataset of subjects among the population. Eventually, innovative machine learning algorithms namely Logistic Regression and Random Forest algorithms are designed to predict onset of disease using this dataset. Comparisons of both algorithms has been done for benchmarking purposes. Test results prediction accuracy is documented as 96.0% indicating the performance measure of classifier. keywords: {Neurological diseases;Machine learning algorithms;Parkinson's disease;Sociology;Prototypes;Prediction algorithms;Classification algorithms;Parkinson's disease;Tremor rating scale;Raspberry Pi;Accelerometer Sensor;Logistic regression;Random forest algorithms},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9573755&isnumber=9573517

R. He et al., "Prediction of rTMS Efficacy in Patients With Essential Tremor: Biomarkers From Individual Resting-State EEG Network," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 32, pp. 3719-3728, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2024.3469576.
Abstract: The pathogenesis of essential tremor (ET) remains unclear, and the efficacy of related drug treatment is inadequate for proper tremor control. Hence, in the current study, consecutive low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) modulation on cerebellum was accomplished in a population of ET patients, along with pre- and post-treatment resting-state electroencephalogram (EEG) networks being constructed. The results primarily clarified the decreasing of resting-state network interactions occurring in ET, especially the weaker frontal-parietal connectivity, compared to healthy individuals. While after the rTMS stimulation, promotions in both network connectivity and properties, as well as clinical scales, were identified. Furthermore, significant correlations between network characteristics and clinical scale scores enabled the development of predictive models for assessing rTMS intervention efficacy. Using a multivariable linear model, clinical scales after one-month rTMS treatment were accurately predicted, underscoring the potential of brain networks in evaluating rTMS effectiveness for ET. The findings consistently demonstrated that repetitive low-frequency rTMS neuromodulation on cerebellum can significantly improve the manifestations of ET, and individual networks will be reliable tools for evaluating the rTMS efficacy, thereby guiding personalized treatment strategies for ET patients.
keywords: {Electroencephalography;Cerebellum;Hospitals;Recording;Predictive models;Neuromodulation;Life sciences;Biomarkers;Protocols;Motors;Essential tremor;multivariable linear predicting model;neuromodulation;repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation;resting-state network},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10697210&isnumber=10398877


Y. Gao, S. Wang, J. Zhao and H. Cai, "Estimation of pathological tremor by using adaptive shifting BMFLC base d on RLS algorithm," 2013 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, Takamatsu, Japan, 2013, pp. 569-574, doi: 10.1109/ICMA.2013.6617979.Abstract: Pathological tremor is an involuntary, rhythmic oscillatory movement and impacts individual living activities. Tremor amplitude and frequency as significant features are important for tremor suppression by biomechanical loading. In this context, an adaptive shifting bandlimited multiple Fourier linear combiner (ASBMFLC) based on recursive least square (RLS) is proposed to estimate the modulated signals with shifting frequency band and zero-phase lag. This method includes digital filter, modified Weighted-Frequency Fourier Linear Combiner (WFLC), modulation of frequency band and Bandlimited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (BMFLC). In WFLC, RLS algorithm instead of least mean square (LMS) is employed to decrease the transit period and accelerate the estimation of dominant frequency. Based on the simulation signals, WFLC, BMFLC and ASBMFLC with RLS algorithm are evaluated, respectively. The results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can adapt to unknown dominant frequency without prior information. Using the proposed algorithm, the voluntary motion/drift is also successfully separated from the tremor portion. keywords: {Frequency modulation;Frequency estimation;Time-frequency analysis;Estimation;Adaptation models;Accuracy;Least squares approximations;Pathological tremor;biomechanical loading;RLS;WFLC;ASBMFLC},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6617979&isnumber=6617877

J. Pope, C. Morgan, A. Masullo, I. Craddock and A. Whone, "Real World Parkinson's Disease Tremor and Score Prediction using Wearable IMU Sensors," 2023 IEEE International Conference on E-health Networking, Application & Services (Healthcom), Chongqing, China, 2023, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/Healthcom56612.2023.10472338.Abstract: Parkinson's Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and prevalence is increasing as populations age. However, because it remains difficult to sensitively evaluate symptom progression, testing of therapies which change the disease course has been hampered (and no such therapy is yet licensed). The more recent use of home monitoring systems provides the potential for providing granular assessment of symptom progression, specifically, tremor evaluation, by continuous monitoring using inertial measurement units. A significant barrier remains in obtaining the ground truth information to assess inference models in these non-laboratory environments. Given these limitations, in this paper we propose a machine learning tremor regression model and classifier heuristic that uses minimal annotations. We use a real-world dataset of 12 participants, where pairs of participants, one with PD and a healthy control, are monitored over a four-day period in a home environment with wrist-worn devices. Our approach leverages the accelerometer frequency-time representation. We evaluate the classifier heuristic on the control participants. The tremor score regression model is trained on the self-assessments of the participants. We show that the tremor classifier can achieve false positive rates (FPR) less than 0.001 (on average one false positive every five hours) on control participants. For a particular participant, we show that the machine learning regression model achieves a mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.46 as compared to a polynomial regression model (degree=3) with MAE of 0.99. This research is the first to provide a semi-supervised machine learning approach using self-report of symptoms to continually predict tremor scores for individuals with PD. keywords: {Measurement units;Parkinson's disease;Sociology;Medical treatment;Machine learning;Biomedical monitoring;Statistics;Parkinson's disease;Pervasive Monitoring;Semi-Supervised Machine Learning;Accelerometer},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10472338&isnumber=10472335

X. Xue, A. Iyer and N. Sharma, "Koopman-based Data-driven Model Predictive Control of Limb Tremor Dynamics with Online Model Updating: A Theoretical Modeling and Simulation Approach," 2023 American Control Conference (ACC), San Diego, CA, USA, 2023, pp. 2873-2878, doi: 10.23919/ACC55779.2023.10156240.Abstract: Patients suffering from tremors have difficulty performing activities of daily living. The development of a model of a limb with tremors can pave the way for non-surgical tremor suppression control techniques. Nevertheless, nonlinearity and actuator saturation make it difficult to develop an accurate model and a tremor suppression control method. Towards addressing this issue, this paper describes a Koopman-based method for system identification and its application to the design of a model predictive control (MPC) scheme to suppress tremors. Since model prediction accuracy is critical to the performance of an MPC, it is essential to update the model online if the predictions are not sufficiently accurate. We propose a recursive least squares (RLS) algorithm to improve control performance with low computational complexity. Finally, for the first time, stability analysis and recursive feasibility of the Koopman-based MPC (KMPC) closed-loop updated system are presented. The proposed modeling and control approach have been validated by experimental data and simulation results. keywords: {Wrist;Actuators;Computational modeling;Predictive models;Prediction algorithms;Data models;Stability analysis},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10156240&isnumber=10155787

F. Xiao, B. Zhong, Y. Wu and Y. Wang, "A Real-Time Bionic Method Inspired by Neural Oscillators for Estimation and Extraction of Pathological Tremor," in IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1129-1139, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2022.3222299.
Abstract: The typical representative of pathological tremor is Parkinson's disease. One of the pathogenesis is that the synchronized neural oscillations within and between brain areas are affected. Inspired by this, this work proposes an algorithm based on neural oscillator to extract voluntary motion and estimate tremor motion in real time, which is named as RTBNO. This algorithm is composed of multiple adaptive modified Hopf oscillators linear combiner. The combiner is divided into two parts: one is used to estimate tremor motion and the other is applied to estimate voluntary motion. As it is updated iteratively in real time, this method has no phase delay. The performance of the proposed method was verified by the simulated action tremor and the actual experimental results of twenty Parkinson's disease patients. For the rest tremor signals of patients, the mean Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) values between the estimated signal and the actual signal was 0.0272±0.0077. The mean RMSE values between the estimated voluntary movement from action tremor and the actual voluntary movement were 0.0360±0.0097 (pick and put motion) and 0.0380±0.0083 (drawing motion). The execution time for the corresponding 10 seconds data was 0.0478s. The comparison results between the proposed method and the existing methods demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method.
keywords: {Oscillators;Pathology;Real-time systems;Estimation;Parkinson's disease;Neural activity;Diseases;Pathological tremor;Parkinson's disease;adaptive oscillator;real time;motion estimation and extraction},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9950713&isnumber=10036335


L. Zhang, V. Koesmahargyo and I. Galatzer-Levy, "Estimation of Clinical Tremor using Spatio-Temporal Adversarial AutoEncoder," 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Milan, Italy, 2021, pp. 8259-8266, doi: 10.1109/ICPR48806.2021.9412995.Abstract: Collecting sufficient well-labeled training data is a challenging task in many clinical applications. Besides the tremendous efforts required for data collection, clinical assessments are also impacted by raters' variabilities, which may be significant even among experienced clinicians. The high demands of reproducible and scalable data-driven approaches in these areas necessitates relevant research on learning with limited data. In this work, we propose a spatio-temporal adversarial autoencoder (ST-AAE) for clinical assessment of hand tremor frequency and severity. The ST-AAE integrates spatial and temporal information simultaneously into the original AAE, taking optical flows as inputs. Using only optical flows, irrelevant background or static objects from RGB frames are largely eliminated, so that the AAE is directed to effectively learn key feature representations of the latent space from tremor movements. The ST-AAE was evaluated with both volunteer and clinical data. The volunteer results showed that the ST-AAE improved model performance significantly by 15% increase on accuracy. Leave-one-out (on subjects) cross validation was used to evaluate the accuracy for all the 3068 video segments from 28 volunteers. The weighted average of the AUCs of ROCs is 0.97. The results demonstrated that the ST-AAE model, trained with a small number of subjects, can be generalized well to different subjects. In addition, the model trained only by volunteer data was also evaluated with 32 clinical videos from 9 essential tremor patients, the model predictions correlate well with the clinical ratings: correlation coefficient r=0.91 and 0.98 for in-person ratings and video watching ratings, respectively. keywords: {Limiting;Training data;Medical services;Predictive models;Particle measurements;Data models;Pattern recognition},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9412995&isnumber=9411911

A. Polato, N. Paredes-Acuña, N. Berberich, E. Menegatti, L. Tonin and G. Cheng, "Using Marker-less Pose Estimation for the Detection and Classification of FES-induced Tremor," 2024 IEEE 20th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), Bari, Italy, 2024, pp. 1580-1585, doi: 10.1109/CASE59546.2024.10711503.Abstract: Tremor is a significant movement disorder characterized by involuntary, rhythmic, oscillatory movement of body parts. Traditional methods for tremor detection and analysis rely on visual evaluation and the use of rating scales. However, marker-less pose estimation (MPE) holds great potential for advancing tremor research by enabling the collection of objective and feature-rich data using a simple camera-based setup. This article aims to demonstrate the applicability of MPE for the extraction of relevant tremor features from hand kinematics and the automation of tremor detection and classification. We conducted an experiment involving three healthy subjects performing movements while a weak tremor was induced with functional electrical stimulation (FES). From multi-perspective camera data, we computed the trajectories of 20 key-points of the hand using the marker-less estimator Anipose. After extracting features from these key-point trajectories we trained machine-learning models to assess their validity in differentiating between tremor and non-tremor signals (detection) and between intention and constant tremor (classification). Despite a small intensity of FES-induced tremor, our system could detect tremor with 70.73% accuracy and classify between intention tremor and non-intention tremor with 79.28% accuracy. In conclusion, this research provides a foundation for the development of an MPE-based method for automated tremor assessment at home, using simple camera-based equipment. keywords: {Automation;Accuracy;Tracking;Pose estimation;Clustering algorithms;Feature extraction;Classification algorithms;Trajectory;Recording;Data mining},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10711503&isnumber=10711288

C. N. Riviere, R. S. Rader and N. V. Thakor, "Adaptive cancelling of physiological tremor for improved precision in microsurgery," in IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 839-846, July 1998, doi: 10.1109/10.686791.
Abstract: Physiological hand tremor impedes microsurgery. We present both a novel adaptive algorithm for tremor estimation and a new technique for active real-time cancelling of physiological tremor. Tremor is modeled online using the weighted-frequency Fourier linear combiner (WFLC). This adaptive algorithm models tremor as a modulating sinusoid, and tracks its frequency, amplitude and phase. Piezoelectric actuators move the surgical instrument tip in opposition to the motion of tremor, effectively subtracting the tremor from the total motion. We demonstrate the technique in 1D using a cantilever apparatus as a benchtop simulation of the surgical instrument. Actual hand motion, prerecorded during simulated surgery, is used as input. In 25 tests, WFLC tremor compensation reduces the RMS tip motion in the 6-16 Hz tremor band by 67%, and reduces the RMS error with respect to an a posteriori estimate of voluntary motion by 30%. The technique can be implemented in a hand-held microsurgical instrument.
keywords: {Microsurgery;Surgery;Adaptive algorithm;Surgical instruments;Impedance;Phase modulation;Amplitude modulation;Frequency;Piezoelectric actuators;Testing},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=686791&isnumber=15067


P. Mcgurrin, J. Mcnames, T. Wu, M. Hallett and D. Haubenberger, "Quantifying Tremor in Essential Tremor Using Inertial Sensors—Validation of an Algorithm," in IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, vol. 9, pp. 1-10, 2021, Art no. 2700110, doi: 10.1109/JTEHM.2020.3032924.
Abstract: Background Assessment of essential tremor is often done by a trained clinician who observes the limbs during different postures and actions and subsequently rates the tremor. While this method has been shown to be reliable, the inter- and intra-rater reliability and need for training can make the use of this method for symptom progression difficult. Many limitations of clinical rating scales can potentially be overcome by using inertial sensors, but to date many algorithms designed to quantify tremor have key limitations. Methods We propose a novel algorithm to characterize tremor using inertial sensors. It uses a two-stage approach that 1) estimates the tremor frequency of a subject and only quantifies tremor near that range; 2) estimates the tremor amplitude as the portion of signal power above baseline activity during recording, allowing tremor estimation even in the presence of other activity; and 3) estimates tremor amplitude in physical units of translation (cm) and rotation (°), consistent with current tremor rating scales. We validated the algorithm technically using a robotic arm and clinically by comparing algorithm output with data reported by a trained clinician administering a tremor rating scale to a cohort of essential tremor patients. Results Technical validation demonstrated rotational amplitude accuracy better than ±0.2 degrees and position amplitude accuracy better than ±0.1 cm. Clinical validation revealed that both rotation and position components were significantly correlated with tremor rating scale scores. Conclusion We demonstrate that our algorithm can quantify tremor accurately even in the presence of other activities, perhaps providing a step forward for at-home monitoring.
keywords: {Accelerometers;Acceleration;Neurological diseases;National Institutes of Health;Gyroscopes;Machine learning algorithms;Essential tremor;inertial sensor;movement disorders;TETRAS},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9234443&isnumber=9246949


A. Ibrahim, Y. Zhou, M. E. Jenkins, M. D. Naish and A. L. Trejos, "Parkinson's Tremor Onset Detection and Active Tremor Classification Using a Multilayer Perceptron," 2020 IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), London, ON, Canada, 2020, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/CCECE47787.2020.9255672.Abstract: The study of the characteristics and behaviour of tremor for people suffering from Parkinson's disease (PD) is an important first step in developing a new method to predict future tremor signals, their onset and the active tremor instances. The current approaches to detect tremor are limited to tremor estimators that rely on simple tremor models, or on deep brain probing that is invasive in nature. Thus, a new method that is noninvasive and that can capture tremor complexity to predict when tremor is active is needed. In this work, a new approach is presented using neural networks (NNs) and data from inertial measurement units (IMUs) to predict tremor onset and classify the active tremor instances in the wrist and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints of the index finger and thumb. The developed model showed an accuracy of 92.9% in predicting and detecting tremor onset, and therefore can be considered a reliable tool that has the potential to be integrated with wearable assistive devices for suppressing tremor. keywords: {Task analysis;Data models;Training;Computational modeling;Biological neural networks;Indexes;Wrist;Parkinson Tremor;Tremor Onset Prediction;Tremor Suppression;Machine Learning;Neural Networks},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9255672&isnumber=9255669

P. Aarabi et al., "A quantitative evaluation of alcohol withdrawal tremors," 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 2015, pp. 6215-6218, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319812.Abstract: This paper evaluates the relation between Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome tremors in the left and right hands of patients. By analyzing 122 recordings from 61 patients in emergency departments, we found a weak relationship between the left and right hand tremor frequencies (correlation coefficient of 0.63). We found a much stronger relationship between the expert physician tremor ratings (on CIWA-Ar 0-7 scale) of the two hands, with a correlation coefficient of 0.923. Next, using a smartphone to collect the tremor data and using a previously developed model for obtaining estimated tremor ratings, we also found a strong correlation (correlation coefficient of 0.852) between the estimates of each hand. Finally, we evaluated different methods of combining the data from the two hands for obtaining a single tremor rating estimate, and found that simply averaging the tremor ratings of the two hands results in the lowest tremor estimate error (an RMSE of 0.977). Looking at the frequency dependence of this error, we found that higher frequency tremors had a much lower estimation error (an RMSE of 1.102 for tremors with frequencies in the 3-6Hz range as compared to 0.625 for tremors with frequencies in the 7-10Hz range). keywords: {Time-frequency analysis;Frequency estimation;Correlation coefficient;Medical services;Mathematical model;Correlation;Accelerometers;tremors;time frequency;quantitative;data fusion;signal analysis},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7319812&isnumber=7318236

H. C. Kamble, P. V. Matrawadi, B. B. Ahuja and E. W. Kulkarni, "Simulation and development of anti tremor apparatus for microsurgery," 2014 Annual IEEE India Conference (INDICON), Pune, India, 2014, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/INDICON.2014.7030487.Abstract: Tremor, an involuntary motion of the muscle, limits the positing accuracy and micromanipulation capability of the surgeon. This paper describes the simulation and development of anti-tremor apparatus mainly consisting of three sub-systems i.e. measurement, tremor estimation algorithm and cancellation control system. Inertial sensor is used for the measurement of hand acceleration and orientation. Adaptive filter differentiates between the tremor and intended motion which was further used for compensation by the actuator to keep the tool tip at the desired position. Robot manipulation concepts have been used for a controlled deviation of tool tip. Low cost, light weight and small are a few advantages of the device. The hand held device also maintains its naturalness for surgeons. keywords: {Estimation;Kinematics;Gravity;Filtering;Mechatronics;Tremor;Active compensation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7030487&isnumber=7030354

P. Shukla, I. Basu, D. Graupe, D. Tuninetti and K. V. Slavin, "A neural network-based design of an on-off adaptive control for Deep Brain Stimulation in movement disorders," 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 4140-4143, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346878.Abstract: The current Food and Drug Administration approved system for the treatment of tremor disorders through Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) of the area of the brain that controls movement, operates open-loop. It does not automatically adapt to the instantaneous patient's needs or to the progression of the disease. This paper demonstrates an adaptive closed-loop controlled DBS that, after switching off stimulation, tracks few physiological signals to predict the reappearance of tremor before the patient experiences discomfort, at which point it instructs the DBS controller to switch on stimulation again. The core of the proposed approach is a Neural Network (NN) which effectively extracts tremor predictive information from non-invasively recorded surface-electromyogram(sEMG) and accelerometer signals measured at the symptomatic extremities. A simple feed-forward back-propagation NN architecture is shown to successfully predict tremor in 31 out of 33 trials in two Parkinson's Disease patients with an overall accuracy of 75.8% and sensitivity of 92.3%. This work therefore shows that closed-loop DBS control is feasible in the near future and that it can be achieved without modifications of the electrodes implanted in the brain, i.e., is backward compatible with approved DBS systems. keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Artificial neural networks;Vectors;Neurons;Biological neural networks;Switches;Accelerometers;Surface EMG;closed-loop deep brain stimulation;feed-forward back-propagation neural network;Levenberg-Marquardt learning algorithm;tremor onset prediction;movement disorders},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6346878&isnumber=6345844

A. Padilha Lanari Bó, C. Azevedo-Coste, P. Poignet, C. Geny and C. Fattal, "On the use of FES to attenuate tremor by modulating joint impedance," 2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European Control Conference, Orlando, FL, USA, 2011, pp. 6498-6503, doi: 10.1109/CDC.2011.6161352.Abstract: In this paper, we describe a closed-loop pathological tremor attenuation system using Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES). The proposed strategy, which is based on the modulation of joint impedance using FES, was developed after experimental evidence was obtained on open-loop trials with tremor patients. The method relies firstly on an online tremor estimation algorithm, which also filters the voluntary motion performed by the patient. Based on this information, the impedance of the trembling joint may be increased accordingly by applying the appropriate stimulation parameters on a pair of antagonist muscles that act on the joint, thus attenuating the effects of tremor. An experimental evaluation of the system, which involved 4 healthy subjects and 1 tremor patient, is also presented. keywords: {Muscles;Joints;Impedance;Pathology;Attenuation;Optical sensors},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6161352&isnumber=6159299

V. K. Ghassab, A. Mohammadi, S. F. Atashzar and R. V. Patel, "Dynamic estimation strategy for E-BMFLC filters in analyzing pathological hand tremors," 2017 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2017, pp. 442-446, doi: 10.1109/GlobalSIP.2017.8308681.Abstract: This paper proposes an adaptive filtering framework for real-time estimation of pathological hand tremors such as those caused by Parkinson's disease (PD) and Essential Tremor (ET). The proposed framework is designed based on Enhanced Band-limited Multiple Fourier Linear Combiner (E-BMFLC), a recently proposed state-of-the-art tremor estimation algorithm. Conventional BMFLC-based filter (and the E-BMFLC technique) are developed based on application of recursive Least Mean Square (LMS) algorithm. There exist variations of BMFLC-based filters that replace LMS approach by the Kalman Filter (KF) to enhance the performance. However, despite the improved performance, the KF increases the computational overhead challenging real-time implementation which is essential in several application such as robotics-assisted tremor suppression. The proposed framework, referred to as the Reduced-order Kalman-based E-BMFLC (RKE-BMFLC), addresses this gap. In particular, we propose a two-step development. First an extension of the E-BMFLC is proposed where classical KF is incorporated in place of the LMS algorithm; then we propose a specifically-designed reduced-order KF implementation to address the computational overhead. Evaluated through experimental pathological tremor data, the proposed RKE-BMFLC technique significantly reduces computational complexity of the conventional KF (for E-BMFLC filter) while is capable of providing improved accuracy level in comparison to the recently-developed LMS-based E-BMFLC technique. keywords: {Pathology;Estimation;Real-time systems;Kalman filters;Signal processing algorithms;Computational efficiency;Frequency conversion},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8308681&isnumber=8308583

V. Rodellar, D. Palacios, P. Gómez and E. Bartolomé, "A methodology for monitoring emotional stress in phonation," 2014 5th IEEE Conference on Cognitive Infocommunications (CogInfoCom), Vietri sul Mare, Italy, 2014, pp. 231-236, doi: 10.1109/CogInfoCom.2014.7020451.Abstract: Stress in phonation is mainly shown in the signature of the fundamental frequency. The proposed methodology is based on the estimation of the vocal fold biomechanics in terms of the distribution of the dynamic mass and the mechanical tension of the vocal fold structure. These parameters are derived from the reconstruction of the glottal source by inverse filtering. The vocal fold mechanical tension correlates (stress and strain), are used as the bases for tremor estimation. The correlates of tension and tremor are used to characterize the spontaneous speech of a database of 40 speakers of both genders (20 male and 20 female). Spontaneous speech consists in short interviews of 20 s of duration where the speakers have to express opinions on hot issues with which they are in agreement (pro) or in disagreement (con) following Arciuli's methodology. The emotional stress is estimated from the biomechanical correlates expressed above (tension and tremor). The null hypothesis formulated as the insensitivity of the speaker to pro and con situations has to be disregarded in view of the results for both genders. Interesting open questions are to be raised regarding the possibility of speakers consciously hiding their true opinion based on political correctness. The discussion will offer different hypotheses to further exploit the objective of detecting self-congruence in spoken messages. keywords: {Stress;Biomechanics;Speech;Estimation;Databases;Biological system modeling;Monitoring;Speech;phonation;self-congruence;stress detection},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7020451&isnumber=7020399

L. Popovic and M. B. Popovic, "Extraction of tremor for control of neural prostheses: Comparison of Discrete Wavelet Transform and Butterworth filter," 2008 9th Symposium on Neural Network Applications in Electrical Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 2008, pp. 137-140, doi: 10.1109/NEUREL.2008.4685591.Abstract: Neural prostheses (NP) for tremor reduction rely on the information of tremor frequencies and their intensity and timing. Better estimation of tremor is important for reliable input to NP. In this work we compare two methods for tremor extraction. Discrete Wavelet Transform and Butterworth filter were used to decompose pathological volitional forearm movement into its slow and fast components. Slow signal is associated with volitional motion while the fast rhythmic signal is the result of involuntary muscular contraction (tremor). Our results suggest that in absence of prior knowledge about tremor frequency characteristics, Wavelet filtering has advantage over other conventional filtering methods. keywords: {Discrete wavelet transforms;Prosthetics;Filtering;Filters;Pathology;Parkinson's disease;Timing;Frequency estimation;Data mining;Signal processing;Neural prostheses;Tremor;Filtering;Wavelets},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=4685591&isnumber=4685533

A. M. Cabral et al., "Evaluation of Deep Brain Stimulation Effect on Motor Signs of Individuals with Movement Disorders Through Gaussian Models," 2021 10th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), Italy, 2021, pp. 585-588, doi: 10.1109/NER49283.2021.9441173.Abstract: In late stages of Parkinson's Disease (PD) or Essential Tremor (ET), surgical treatments, such as Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS), are promising. However, conventional DBS devices are open-loop systems in which the stimulation intensity is constant regardless of the dynamic behavior of motor manifestations. In this sense the seek to objective strategies that can assess the efficacy of DBS is relevant for the development of precise medicine, promoting the implementation of closed-loop DBS. This study proposes the use of individualized Gaussian models to evaluate the motor signs of people with PD and ET considering DBS in ON and OFF states. Inertial data were collected from the left and right hands and forearms of the participants. After data preprocessing, amplitude and variability-based features were extracted to estimate specific Gaussian models for each individual. An objective metric that is sensitive to the distance of models from DBS in ON and OFF states was proposed. The specific Gaussian models allowed for the estimate of tremor probability in the DBS states. The estimated values of the proposed metric discriminated between the DBS ON and OFF states, and the verification of the DBS effect on the motor sign of each individual. The specific Gaussian models can be used as part of a closed-loop DBS system to estimate the tremor severity of patients. keywords: {Adaptation models;Inertial sensors;Satellite broadcasting;Deep brain stimulation;Surgery;Probability density function;Feature extraction},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9441173&isnumber=9441064

J. -S. Brittain, P. Probert-Smith and T. Z. Aziz, "Demand driven deep brain stimulation: Regimes and autoregressive hidden Markov implementation," 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010, pp. 158-161, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627242.Abstract: Deep brain stimulation is an increasingly prevalent surgical option in the treatment of a multitude of neurological conditions, most notably Parkinson's disease. The development of a neurofeedback device is driven primarily by stimulator habituation, surgical risk factors, the cost of battery replacement, and reported neuropsychiatric side-effects under prolonged chronic administration. Here we present two distinct regimes for stimulation delivery in chronic and acute symptomatic conditions, presented in the context of Parkinsonian bradykinesias and tremor. Implementation strategies are discussed with a focus on vector-autoregressive hidden Markov models for tremor prediction. Detection of simple motor actions versus tremor are compared in a preliminary performance analysis. keywords: {Hidden Markov models;Monitoring;Satellite broadcasting;Kalman filters;Classification algorithms;Brain stimulation;Surgery},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5627242&isnumber=5625939

M. H. Lee, G. Cho, J. Im, J. Na and C. Song, "Handheld Confocal Endomicroscope System with Tremor Compensation for Retinal Imaging," 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Hangzhou, China, 2025, pp. 11220-11226, doi: 10.1109/IROS60139.2025.11246544.Abstract: Advancements in biophotonics have driven the development of miniaturized imaging probes for high-resolution in vivo imaging. Probe-based confocal laser endomicroscopy (pCLE) enables cellular-level visualization of tissues but remains challenging for retinal imaging due to the need for non-contact operation, tremor compensation, and precise focal control. This study introduces a novel handheld confocal endomi-croscope system that integrates a custom-built imaging probe, an optical coherence tomography (OCT) distance sensor, and motor-assisted tremor suppression to improve imaging stability and resolution. The system employs a fiber-based common-path swept-source OCT (CPSS-OCT) sensor to maintain a stable focal distance while compensating for involuntary hand tremors using motorized stabilization. A gated recurrent unit (GRU)-based tremor prediction algorithm further enhances image stability. The imaging probe features a PZT tube-driven fiber cantilever resonance for Lissajous scanning, providing a wide field of view with minimal image distortion. In experiments using bovine eye samples, the CR score improved from 0.318 to 0.472, with a 48.43% increase in the in-focus condition when tremor compensation was activated, confirming enhanced image clarity and stability. Experimental results demonstrate that the system effectively stabilizes imaging, reduces motion artifacts, and ensures high-resolution, non-contact retinal imaging. By addressing the limitations of conventional pCLE devices, this system represents a significant advancement in ophthalmic imaging and can potentially improve retinal diagnostics and precision-guided interventions. keywords: {Optical fiber sensors;Visualization;Optical coherence tomography;Imaging;Laser stability;Retina;Robot sensing systems;Prediction algorithms;Resonance;Probes},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11246544&isnumber=11245652

S. Abirami B, E. F. Sundarsingh and V. S. Ramalingam, "On-Body RF Sensor Toward Tremor Detection in Parkinson's Disease," in IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2814-2817, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TMECH.2020.3045139.
Abstract: This article presents a conformal and on-body RF sensor with reduced wiring complexity for tremor detection in Parkinson's disease evaluation. RF sensor aids in detecting and extracting continuous finger movement that makes exact and repeated estimation of tremor feasible. The shift in frequency during finger motion is investigated to monitor tremor. The sensor is developed on a finger cap in such a way that it conforms to the shape of a human finger. The realized sensor can detect relative angle changes with an accuracy of 0.57o. The fabricated sensor is tested in real-time with variations in finger length, diameter, and skin thickness. The influence of these variations on the frequency shift is investigated using analysis of the variance and fuzzy method. The correlation value of 98% between experimental and predicted values is obtained using the fuzzy logic.
keywords: {Fingers;Robot sensing systems;Skin;Resonant frequency;Radio frequency;Bending;Fuzzy logic;Analysis of variance (ANOVA);fuzzy analysis;motion detection;on-body sensor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9296371&isnumber=9570750


M. F. S. Almeida, G. L. Cavalheiro, D. A. Furtado, A. A. Pereira and A. O. Andrade, "Quantification of physiological kinetic tremor and its correlation with aging," 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 2631-2634, doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346504.Abstract: Tremor is the most common movement disorder characterized by repetitive and stereotyped movements. The analysis of hand-drawing movements is commonly used in the evaluation of patients with tremor. The data collection conducted under kinetic conditions and while performing a voluntary movement highlights the kinetic tremor. Most investigations on tremor attempt to understand its relation to neuromuscular dysfunctions. Therefore, there is a lack of studies that aim to investigate the complex relation between the physiological tremor and aging, especially in kinetic conditions. In this context, the main motivation of this research was to generalize the results obtained in Almeida et al.[1], a study that quantified age-related changes in the kinetic tremor of clinically healthy individuals. For this, a number of features extracted from tremor activity, obtained from digitized drawings of Archimedes' spirals, were analyzed. The analyses followed the sequence: Linearization of the Archimedes' spiral; Estimate of tremor activity; Data pre-processing; Feature extraction from the tremor activity; and Application of Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) technique as described in Almeida et al. [1]. The generalization of the obtained results showed that the method based on LDA allows for a linear correlation between physiological kinetic tremor and aging. keywords: {Spirals;Physiology;Kinetic theory;Feature extraction;Correlation;Aging;Band pass filters},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6346504&isnumber=6345844

P. Shukla et al., "A decision tree classifier for postural and movement conditions in Essential Tremor patients," 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), San Diego, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 117-120, doi: 10.1109/NER.2013.6695885.Abstract: This paper proposes a decision tree based classifier to discriminate between movement and postural conditions in Essential Tremor (ET) patients when their Deep Brain Stimulator (DBS) is switched OFF and they do not yet present tremor symptoms. This aims to be the first stage of a fully automated closed-loop ON-OFF DBS system in which the algorithm for prediction of tremor onset uses optimized parameters depending on the patient's postural or movement condition. The classifier inputs are the power of the surface-electromyogram (sEMG) and accelerometer (Acc) signals recorded at the symptomatic extremities of the patients. The proposed classification tree uses Gini splitting rule and an optimized pruning scheme. The classifier achieves an overall accuracy of 96.55% by correctly classifying 112 out of 116 trials in four ET patients: 49 trials were in the movement condition and 67 were in postural condition. A classification accuracy of 100.00% (49 trials out of 49) and 94.03% (63 trials out of 67) is achieved for movement and posture conditions, respectively. keywords: {Satellite broadcasting;Accuracy;Artificial neural networks;Decision trees;Impurities;Electromyography;Brain stimulation;Decision tree classifier;Gini index impurity function;Essential Tremor;Surface EMG;Closed-loop deep brain stimulation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6695885&isnumber=6695843

A. Channa, G. Ruggeri, N. Mammone, R. -C. Ifrim, A. Iera and N. Popescu, "Parkinson’s Disease Severity Estimation using Deep Learning and Cloud Technology," 2022 IEEE International Conference on Omni-layer Intelligent Systems (COINS), Barcelona, Spain, 2022, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/COINS54846.2022.9854945.Abstract: The management of motor complications in Parkinson’s disease (PD) is an unmet need. This paper proposes an eHealth platform for Parkinson’s disease (PD) severity estimation using a cloud-based and deep learning (DL) approach. The system quantifies the hallmark symptoms of PD using motor signals of patients with PD (PwPD). In this study, the dataset named "The Michael J. Fox Foundation-funded Levodopa Response Study" is used for the development and evaluation of computational methods focusing on severity estimation of motor function in response to the levodopa treatment. The data is derived from a wearable inertial device, named Shimmer 3, to collect motion data from a patient’s upper limb which is more affected by the disease during the performance of some standard activities selected by MDS-UPDRS III and at home while performing daily life activities (DLAs). Seventeen PwPD were enrolled from two clinical sites, who have varying degrees of motor impairment. An incorporated cloud-based framework is proposed where patients’ motion data is saved in MS Azure cloud where an automatic evaluation of patients’ motor activities in response to the levodopa dose is performed using continuous wavelet transform and CNN-based transfer learning approach. Experimental results show that the efficiency and the robustness of the proposed procedure are proven by 90.0% accuracy for tremor estimation and 86.4% for bradykinesia, with good performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity in each class. keywords: {Performance evaluation;Drugs;Deep learning;Continuous wavelet transforms;Transfer learning;Estimation;Feature extraction;Parkinson’s disease;cloud computing;deep learning;severity estimation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9854945&isnumber=9854933

G. Rigas et al., "Assessment of Tremor Activity in the Parkinson’s Disease Using a Set of Wearable Sensors," in IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 478-487, May 2012, doi: 10.1109/TITB.2011.2182616.
Abstract: Tremor is the most common motor disorder of Parkinson's disease (PD) and consequently its detection plays a crucial role in the management and treatment of PD patients. The current diagnosis procedure is based on subject-dependent clinical assessment, which has a difficulty in capturing subtle tremor features. In this paper, an automated method for both resting and action/postural tremor assessment is proposed using a set of accelerometers mounted on different patient's body segments. The estimation of tremor type (resting/action postural) and severity is based on features extracted from the acquired signals and hidden Markov models. The method is evaluated using data collected from 23 subjects (18 PD patients and 5 control subjects). The obtained results verified that the proposed method successfully: 1) quantifies tremor severity with 87 % accuracy, 2) discriminates resting from postural tremor, and 3) discriminates tremor from other Parkinsonian motor symptoms during daily activities.
keywords: {Feature extraction;Hidden Markov models;Accelerometers;Legged locomotion;Parkinson's disease;Sensor phenomena and characterization;Hidden Markov models (HMMs);Levodopa-induced dyskinesia (LID);Parkinson’s disease (PD);posture recognition;tremor},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6121951&isnumber=6193253


E. Rocon et al., "Multimodal BCI-mediated FES suppression of pathological tremor," 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010, pp. 3337-3340, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627914.Abstract: Tremor constitutes the most common movement disorder; in fact 14.5% of population between 50 to 89 years old suffers from it. Moreover, 65% of patients with upper limb tremor report disability when performing their activities of daily living (ADL). Unfortunately, 25% of patients do not respond to drugs or neurosurgery. In this regard, TREMOR project proposes functional compensation of upper limb tremors with a soft wearable robot that applies biomechanical loads through functional electrical stimulation (FES) of muscles. This wearable robot is driven by a Brain Neural Computer Interface (BNCI). This paper presents a multimodal BCI to assess generation, transmission and execution of both volitional and tremorous movements based on electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG) and inertial sensors (IMUs). These signals are combined to obtain: 1) the intention to perform a voluntary movement from cortical activity (EEG), 2) tremor onset, and an estimation of tremor frequency from muscle activation (EMG), and 3) instantaneous tremor amplitude and frequency from kinematic measurements (IMUs). Integration of this information will provide control signals to drive the FES-based wearable robot. keywords: {Electromyography;Electroencephalography;Sensors;Frequency estimation;Estimation;Brain modeling;Muscles},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5627914&isnumber=5625939

